We find it difficult to express the emotions with which Charlotte's soul
was agitated during the whole of this time, whether in relation to her
husband or to her unfortunate friend; although we are enabled, by our
knowledge of her character, to understand their nature.

It is certain that she had formed a determination, by every means in
her power to keep Werther at a distance; and, if she hesitated in her
decision, it was from a sincere feeling of friendly pity, knowing how
much it would cost him, indeed, that he would find it almost impossible
to comply with her wishes. But various causes now urged her to be firm.
Her husband preserved a strict silence about the whole matter; and she
never made it a subject of conversation, feeling bound to prove to him
by her conduct that her sentiments agreed with his.

The same day, which was the Sunday before Christmas, after Werther had
written the last-mentioned letter to his friend, he came in the evening
to Charlotte's house, and found her alone. She was busy preparing some
little gifts for her brothers and sisters, which were to be distributed
to them on Christmas Day. He began talking of the delight of
the children, and of that age when the sudden appearance of the
Christmas-tree, decorated with fruit and sweetmeats, and lighted up with
wax candles, causes such transports of joy. "You shall have a gift too,
if you behave well," said Charlotte, hiding her embarrassment under
sweet smile. "And what do you call behaving well? What should I do, what
can I do, my dear Charlotte?" said he. "Thursday night," she answered,
"is Christmas Eve. The children are all to be here, and my father too:
there is a present for each; do you come likewise, but do not come
before that time." Werther started. "I desire you will not: it must be
so," she continued. "I ask it of you as a favour, for my own peace and
tranquillity. We cannot go on in this manner any longer." He turned away
his face, walked hastily up and down the room, muttering indistinctly,
"We cannot go on in this manner any longer!" Charlotte, seeing the
violent agitation into which these words had thrown him, endeavoured
to divert his thoughts by different questions, but in vain. "No,
Charlotte!" he exclaimed; "I will never see you any more!" "And why so?"
she answered. "We may—we must see each other again; only let it be
with more discretion. Oh! why were you born with that excessive, that
ungovernable passion for everything that is dear to you?" Then, taking
his hand, she said, "I entreat of you to be more calm: your talents,
your understanding, your genius, will furnish you with a thousand
resources. Be a man, and conquer an unhappy attachment toward a creature
who can do nothing but pity you." He bit his lips, and looked at her
with a gloomy countenance. She continued to hold his hand. "Grant me but
a moment's patience, Werther," she said. "Do you not see that you are
deceiving yourself, that you are seeking your own destruction? Why must
you love me, me only, who belong to another? I fear, I much fear, that
it is only the impossibility of possessing me which makes your desire
for me so strong." He drew back his hand, whilst he surveyed her with a
wild and angry look. "'Tis well!" he exclaimed, "'tis very well! Did not
Albert furnish you with this reflection? It is profound, a very profound
remark." "A reflection that any one might easily make," she answered;
"and is there not a woman in the whole world who is at liberty, and has
the power to make you happy? Conquer yourself: look for such a being,
and believe me when I say that you will certainly find her. I have long
felt for you, and for us all: you have confined yourself too long within
the limits of too narrow a circle. Conquer yourself; make an effort: a
short journey will be of service to you. Seek and find an object worthy
of your love; then return hither, and let us enjoy together all the
happiness of the most perfect friendship."

"This speech," replied Werther with a cold smile, "this speech should
be printed, for the benefit of all teachers. My dear Charlotte, allow me
but a short time longer, and all will be well." "But however, Werther,"
she added, "do not come again before Christmas." He was about to make
some answer, when Albert came in. They saluted each other coldly, and
with mutual embarrassment paced up and down the room. Werther made
some common remarks; Albert did the same, and their conversation soon
dropped. Albert asked his wife about some household matters; and,
finding that his commissions were not executed, he used some expressions
which, to Werther's ear, savoured of extreme harshness. He wished to go,
but had not power to move; and in this situation he remained till eight
o'clock, his uneasiness and discontent continually increasing. At length
the cloth was laid for supper, and he took up his hat and stick. Albert
invited him to remain; but Werther, fancying that he was merely paying a
formal compliment, thanked him coldly, and left the house.

Werther returned home, took the candle from his servant, and retired
to his room alone. He talked for some time with great earnestness to
himself, wept aloud, walked in a state of great excitement through his
chamber; till at length, without undressing, he threw himself on the
bed, where he was found by his servant at eleven o'clock, when the
latter ventured to enter the room, and take off his boots. Werther did
not prevent him, but forbade him to come in the morning till he should
ring.

On Monday morning, the 21st of December, he wrote to Charlotte the
following letter, which was found, sealed, on his bureau after his
death, and was given to her. I shall insert it in fragments; as it
appears, from several circumstances, to have been written in that
manner.

"It is all over, Charlotte: I am resolved to die! I make this
declaration deliberately and coolly, without any romantic passion, on
this morning of the day when I am to see you for the last time. At the
moment you read these lines, O best of women, the cold grave will hold
the inanimate remains of that restless and unhappy being who, in the
last moments of his existence, knew no pleasure so great as that of
conversing with you! I have passed a dreadful night or rather, let me
say, a propitious one; for it has given me resolution, it has fixed my
purpose. I am resolved to die. When I tore myself from you yesterday,
my senses were in tumult and disorder; my heart was oppressed, hope and
pleasure had fled from me for ever, and a petrifying cold had seized
my wretched being. I could scarcely reach my room. I threw myself on
my knees; and Heaven, for the last time, granted me the consolation of
shedding tears. A thousand ideas, a thousand schemes, arose within my
soul; till at length one last, fixed, final thought took possession of
my heart. It was to die. I lay down to rest; and in the morning, in the
quiet hour of awakening, the same determination was upon me. To die! It
is not despair: it is conviction that I have filled up the measure of
my sufferings, that I have reached my appointed term, and must sacrifice
myself for thee. Yes, Charlotte, why should I not avow it? One of us
three must die: it shall be Werther. O beloved Charlotte! this heart,
excited by rage and fury, has often conceived the horrid idea of
murdering your husband—you—myself! The lot is cast at length. And in
the bright, quiet evenings of summer, when you sometimes wander toward
the mountains, let your thoughts then turn to me: recollect how often
you have watched me coming to meet you from the valley; then bend your
eyes upon the churchyard which contains my grave, and, by the light of
the setting sun, mark how the evening breeze waves the tall grass
which grows above my tomb. I was calm when I began this letter, but the
recollection of these scenes makes me weep like a child."

About ten in the morning, Werther called his servant, and, whilst he
was dressing, told him that in a few days he intended to set out upon
a journey, and bade him therefore lay his clothes in order, and prepare
them for packing up, call in all his accounts, fetch home the books
he had lent, and give two months' pay to the poor dependants who were
accustomed to receive from him a weekly allowance.

He breakfasted in his room, and then mounted his horse, and went to
visit the steward, who, however, was not at home. He walked pensively
in the garden, and seemed anxious to renew all the ideas that were most
painful to him.

The children did not suffer him to remain alone long. They followed him,
skipping and dancing before him, and told him, that after to-morrow and
tomorrow and one day more, they were to receive their Christmas gift
from Charlotte; and they then recounted all the wonders of which they
had formed ideas in their child imaginations. "Tomorrow and tomorrow,"
said he, "and one day more!" And he kissed them tenderly. He was going;
but the younger boy stopped him, to whisper something in his ear. He
told him that his elder brothers had written splendid New-Year's wishes
so large! one for papa, and another for Albert and Charlotte, and one
for Werther; and they were to be presented early in the morning, on
New Year's Day. This quite overcame him. He made each of the children
a present, mounted his horse, left his compliments for papa and mamma,
and, with tears in his eyes, rode away from the place.

He returned home about five o'clock, ordered his servant to keep up
his fire, desired him to pack his books and linen at the bottom of the
trunk, and to place his coats at the top. He then appears to have made
the following addition to the letter addressed to Charlotte:

"You do not expect me. You think I will obey you, and not visit you
again till Christmas Eve. O Charlotte, today or never! On Christmas Eve
you will hold this paper in your hand; you will tremble, and moisten it
with your tears. I will—I must! Oh, how happy I feel to be determined!"

In the meantime, Charlotte was in a pitiable state of mind. After her
last conversation with Werther, she found how painful to herself it
would be to decline his visits, and knew how severely he would suffer
from their separation.

She had, in conversation with Albert, mentioned casually that Werther
would not return before Christmas Eve; and soon afterward Albert went
on horseback to see a person in the neighbourhood, with whom he had to
transact some business which would detain him all night.

Charlotte was sitting alone. None of her family were near, and she gave
herself up to the reflections that silently took possession of her mind.
She was for ever united to a husband whose love and fidelity she had
proved, to whom she was heartily devoted, and who seemed to be a special
gift from Heaven to ensure her happiness. On the other hand, Werther had
become dear to her. There was a cordial unanimity of sentiment between
them from the very first hour of their acquaintance, and their long
association and repeated interviews had made an indelible impression
upon her heart. She had been accustomed to communicate to him every
thought and feeling which interested her, and his absence threatened to
open a void in her existence which it might be impossible to fill. How
heartily she wished that she might change him into her brother,—that
she could induce him to marry one of her own friends, or could
reestablish his intimacy with Albert.

She passed all her intimate friends in review before her mind, but found
something objectionable in each, and could decide upon none to whom she
would consent to give him.

Amid all these considerations she felt deeply but indistinctly that her
own real but unexpressed wish was to retain him for herself, and her
pure and amiable heart felt from this thought a sense of oppression
which seemed to forbid a prospect of happiness. She was wretched: a dark
cloud obscured her mental vision.

It was now half-past six o'clock, and she heard Werther's step on the
stairs. She at once recognised his voice, as he inquired if she were at
home. Her heart beat audibly—we could almost say for the first time—at
his arrival. It was too late to deny herself; and, as he entered, she
exclaimed, with a sort of ill concealed confusion, "You have not kept
your word!" "I promised nothing," he answered. "But you should have
complied, at least for my sake," she continued. "I implore you, for both
our sakes."

She scarcely knew what she said or did; and sent for some friends, who,
by their presence, might prevent her being left alone with Werther. He
put down some books he had brought with him, then made inquiries about
some others, until she began to hope that her friends might arrive
shortly, entertaining at the same time a desire that they might stay
away.

At one moment she felt anxious that the servant should remain in the
adjoining room, then she changed her mind. Werther, meanwhile, walked
impatiently up and down. She went to the piano, and determined not
to retire. She then collected her thoughts, and sat down quietly at
Werther's side, who had taken his usual place on the sofa.

"Have you brought nothing to read?" she inquired. He had nothing. "There
in my drawer," she continued, "you will find your own translation of
some of the songs of Ossian. I have not yet read them, as I have still
hoped to hear you recite them; but, for some time past, I have not been
able to accomplish such a wish." He smiled, and went for the manuscript,
which he took with a shudder. He sat down; and, with eyes full of tears,
he began to read.
