He had broken his futile lance against the windmill. The image suggested by M. de Kercadiou persisted in his mind. He realized it was only by sheer good fortune that he had escaped unhurt. There remained the wind itself, the whirlwind. The events in Rennes, a reflex of the graver events in Nantes, had set that wind blowing in his favor.

He set out briskly to retrace his steps toward the Place Royale. The gathering of the populace was greatest there, and he judged it to be the heart and brain of the commotion exciting the city.

But the commotion he had left there was nothing compared to what he found on his return. Earlier, there had been a comparative hush to listen to a speaker denouncing the First and Second Estates from the pedestal of the statue of Louis XV. Now, the air vibrated with the angry voice of the multitude itself. Here and there, men fought with canes and fists. A fierce excitement raged everywhere, and the gendarmes sent by the King's Lieutenant to restore order were helpless flotsam in that tempestuous human ocean.

There were cries of "To the Palais! Down with the assassins! Down with the nobles! To the Palais!"

An artisan standing shoulder to shoulder with him in the crowd explained the increased excitement.

"They've shot him dead. His body is lying there where it fell at the foot of the statue. And another student was killed not an hour ago over there by the cathedral works. By God! If they can't prevail in one way, they'll prevail in another." The man was fiercely emphatic. "They'll stop at nothing. If they can't overawe us, they'll assassinate us. They are determined to conduct these States of Brittany in their own way. No interests but their own shall be considered."

André-Louis left him talking and forced his way through the human press.

At the statue's base, he came upon a small cluster of students gathered around the murdered lad's body. All of them were stricken with fear and helplessness.

"You here, Moreau!" a voice said.

He looked around to find himself confronted by a slight, swarthy man of little more than thirty. The man had a firm mouth and an impertinent nose, and he looked at André-Louis with disapproval. It was Le Chapelier, a lawyer of Rennes and a prominent member of the city's Literary Chamber. He was a forceful man, fertile in revolutionary ideas and gifted with exceptional eloquence.

"Ah, it is you, Chapelier! Why don't you speak to them? Why don't you tell them what to do? Up with you, man!" He pointed to the plinth.

Le Chapelier's dark, restless eyes searched the other's impassive face for some trace of the irony he suspected. The two were poles apart in their political views. While André-Louis was mistrusted by all his colleagues in the Literary Chamber of Rennes, none mistrusted him as thoroughly as this vigorous republican. Indeed, if Le Chapelier had been able to overcome the influence of the seminarist Vilmorin, André-Louis would have long since been excluded from that assembly of intellectual youth. He exasperated them with his eternal mockery of their ideals.

So now, Le Chapelier suspected mockery in that invitation. He suspected it even when he failed to find traces of it on André-Louis's face, having learned from experience that it was a face not often to be trusted for an indication of the real thoughts behind it.

"Your notions and mine on that score can hardly coincide," he said.

"Can there be two opinions?" André-Louis asked.

"There are usually two opinions whenever you and I are together, Moreau. And more than ever now that you are the appointed delegate of a nobleman. You see what your friends have done. No doubt you approve of their methods." He was coldly hostile.

André-Louis looked at him without surprise. Since they were invariably opposed in academic debates, how could Le Chapelier suspect his present intentions?

"If you won't tell them what is to be done, I will," he said.

"In God's name! If you want to invite a bullet from the other side, I will not hinder you. It may help to square the account."

He repented the words almost as soon as they were out, for André-Louis sprang up onto the plinth as if answering a challenge. Alarmed now, Le Chapelier assumed André-Louis intended to speak on behalf of Privilege as a publicly appointed representative. He clutched André-Louis's leg to pull him back down.

"Ah, no!" he shouted. "Come down, you fool. Do you think we will let you ruin everything with your clowning? Come down!"

André-Louis maintained his position by clutching one of the legs of the bronze horse. He flung his voice like a bugle note over the heads of the seething mob.

"Citizens of Rennes, the motherland is in danger!"

The effect was electric. A stir ran across the upturned faces like a ripple over water, followed by complete silence. In that great silence, they looked at this slim young man. He was hatless, with long wisps of his black hair fluttering in the breeze. His neckcloth was in disorder, his face white, and his eyes on fire.

André-Louis felt a sudden surge of exaltation. He realized by instinct that he had seized the crowd at one grip and held it fast in the spell of his cry and audacity.

Even Le Chapelier, though still clinging to his ankle, had ceased tugging. Though unshaken in his assumption about André-Louis's intentions, the reformer was momentarily bewildered by the first note of his appeal.

And then, slowly and impressively, in a voice that traveled clear to the ends of the square, the young lawyer of Gavrillac began to speak.

"Shuddering in horror at the vile deed perpetrated here, my voice demands to be heard. You have seen murder done under your eyes. It was the murder of one who nobly, without thought of himself, gave voice to the wrongs oppressing us all. Fearing that voice, and shunning the truth as foul things shun the light, our oppressors sent their agents to silence him in death."

Le Chapelier finally released his hold on André-Louis's ankle, staring up at him in sheer amazement. It seemed the fellow was in earnest, serious for once, and for once on the right side. What had come over him?

"What shall you look for from assassins but assassination? I have a tale to tell which will show that this is no new thing you have witnessed here today. It will reveal the forces you have to deal with. Yesterday..."

There was an interruption. A voice in the crowd, some twenty paces away, shouted out.

"Yet another of them!"

Immediately after the voice came a pistol shot, and a bullet flattened itself against the bronze figure just behind André-Louis.

Instantly, there was turmoil in the crowd, most intense around the spot where the shot had been fired. The assailant belonged to a considerable group of the opposition. This group found itself beset on every side and hard-pressed to defend him.

From the foot of the plinth, the students' voices rang out, chorusing with Le Chapelier to bid André-Louis seek shelter.

"Come down! Come down at once! They'll murder you just as they murdered La Rivière."

"Let them!" He flung his arms wide in a supremely theatrical gesture and laughed. "I stand here at their mercy. Let them add my blood to the blood that will presently rise up to choke them. Let them assassinate me. It is a trade they understand. But until they do so, they shall not prevent me from speaking to you. They shall not prevent me from telling you what to expect from them." He laughed again, not merely in exaltation as the watchers below supposed. Also in amusement. His amusement had two sources. One was discovering how glibly he uttered the phrases proper to whip up a crowd's emotions. The other was remembering how the crafty Cardinal de Retz used to hire men to fire on his carriage to inflame popular sympathy. He was in just such a case as that arch-politician. True, he had not hired the fellow to fire the pistol shot. He was none the less obliged to him and ready to derive full advantage from the act.

The group protecting the gunman battled on, trying to hew a way out of the angry, heaving press.

"Let them go!" André-Louis called down. "What matters one assassin more or less? Let them go, and listen to me, my countrymen!"

Presently, when some order was restored, he began his tale. Using simple language, yet with a vehemence and directness that drove home every point, he tore their hearts with the story of yesterday's happenings at Gavrillac. He drew tears with the pathos of his picture of the bereaved widow Mabey and her three starving, destitute children, orphaned to avenge the death of a pheasant. He spoke of the bereaved mother of M. de Vilmorin, a student of Rennes known to many of them. He had met his death in a noble endeavor to champion the cause of an esurient member of their afflicted order.

"The Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr said of him that he had too dangerous a gift of eloquence. He killed him to silence his brave voice. But he has failed in his object. I, poor Philippe de Vilmorin's friend, have assumed the mantle of his apostleship. I speak to you with his voice today."

It was a statement that finally helped Le Chapelier understand, at least in part, this bewildering change in André-Louis, rendering him faithless to the side that employed him.

"I am not here merely to demand vengeance upon Philippe de Vilmorin's murderers," André-Louis continued. "I am here to tell you the things he would have told you today had he lived."

So far, at least, he was frank. But he did not add that these were things he did not believe himself. He considered them the cant by which an ambitious bourgeoisie, speaking through lawyers, sought to overthrow the present state of things to its own advantage. He left his audience believing that the views he expressed were the ones he held.

Now, in a terrible voice and with an eloquence that amazed himself, he denounced the inertia of royal justice when the great are the offenders. With bitter sarcasm, he spoke of their King's Lieutenant, M. de Lesdiguières.

"Do you wonder that M. de Lesdiguières should administer the law so that it is always favorable to our great nobles?" he asked. "Would it be just or reasonable for him to administer it otherwise?" He paused dramatically to let his sarcasm sink in. It had the effect of reawakening Le Chapelier's doubts and checking his dawning conviction in André-Louis's sincerity. Where was he going now?

He was not left in doubt for long. Proceeding, André-Louis spoke exactly as he conceived Philippe de Vilmorin would have spoken. He had argued with him so often, and attended the Literary Chamber discussions so frequently, that he had all the reformers' rant at his fingertips. And it was true in substance.

"Consider the composition of this France of ours. A million of its inhabitants are members of the privileged classes. They compose France. They are France. For surely you cannot suppose the remainder matters. It cannot be pretended that twenty-four million souls are of any account, that they can represent this great nation, or that they exist for any purpose but servitude to the million elect."

Bitter laughter shook the crowd, just as he desired.

"Seeing their privileges in danger of invasion by these twenty-four millions, mostly canaille created to be slaves, does it surprise you that the dispensing of royal justice is placed in the stout hands of these Lesdiguières? Men without brains to think or hearts to be touched? Consider what must be defended against our assault. Consider a few of the feudal rights in danger of being swept away if the Privileged yield even to their sovereign's commands and admit the Third Estate to an equal vote."

"What would become of the right of terrage on the land, of parcière on the fruit trees, of carpot on the vines? What of the corvées by which they command forced labor? What of the ban de vendange, giving them the first vintage, or the banvin, enabling them to control the sale of wine? What of their right to grind the last coin of taxation from the people to maintain their opulent estate? The cens and lods-et-ventes absorb a fifth of the land's value. The blairie must be paid before herds can feed on communal lands. The pulverage indemnifies them for dust raised on their roads by herds going to market. There is the sextelage on everything sold in public markets, the étalonnage, and all the rest. What of their rights over men and animals for field labor, over ferries and bridges, sinking wells, warrens, dovecots. Fires, which yields them a tax on every peasant hearth? What of their exclusive fishing and hunting rights, the violation of which is almost a capital offense?"

"And what of other rights, unspeakable and abominable, over the lives and bodies of their people? Rights which, if rarely exercised, have never been rescinded. To this day, if a noble returning from the hunt were to slay two of his serfs to bathe his feet in their blood, he could claim his absolute feudal right as a sufficient defense."

"Rough-shod, these million Privileged ride over the souls and bodies of twenty-four million contemptible canaille existing only for their pleasure. Woe betide anyone who raises his voice in the name of humanity against these excessive abuses. I have told you of one remorselessly slain in cold blood for doing no more than that. Your own eyes have witnessed the assassination of another upon this plinth, yet another by the cathedral works, and the attempt upon my own life."

"Between them and the justice due to them stand these Lesdiguières, these King's Lieutenants. They are not instruments of justice, but walls erected to shelter Privilege and Abuse."

"Do you wonder that they will not yield an inch? They resist the election of a Third Estate with the voting power to sweep all these privileges away. They refuse to submit themselves to a just equality with the meanest of the canaille they trample underfoot. They refuse to provide that the money necessary to save this state from bankruptcy shall be raised by taxation borne by themselves in equal proportion."

"Sooner than yield, they prefer to resist even the royal command."

A phrase Vilmorin had used yesterday occurred to him. He had refused to attach importance to it then, but he used it now.

"In doing this, they are striking at the very foundations of the throne. These fools do not perceive that if the throne falls, it is those standing nearest to it who will be crushed."

A terrific roar acclaimed that statement. Tense and quivering with excitement, he stood a moment smiling ironically. Then he waved them into silence, seeing by their ready obedience how completely he possessed them. In his voice, they each recognized their own, giving expression to the thoughts that had been stirring inarticulately in their minds.

Presently he resumed, speaking more quietly, the ironic smile growing more marked.

"In taking my leave of M. de Lesdiguières, I gave him a warning from natural history. I told him that when wolves, roaming singly through the jungle, weary of being hunted by the tiger, they band themselves into packs and hunt the tiger in turn. M. de Lesdiguières contemptuously answered that he did not understand me. But your wits are better than his. You understand me, I think. Don't you?"

A great roar, mingled with approving laughter, was his answer. He had wrought them up to a dangerous passion, and they were ripe for any violence. If he had failed with the windmill, at least he was now master of the wind.

"To the Palais!" they shouted, brandishing canes and swords. "To the Palais! Down with M. de Lesdiguières! Death to the King's Lieutenant!"

He was master of the wind indeed. His dangerous gift of oratory had given him this mastery. At his bidding, the gale would sweep away the windmill against which he had flung himself in vain. But that was no part of his intent.

"Ah, wait!" he bade them. "Is this miserable instrument of a corrupt system worth your noble indignation?"

He hoped his words would be reported to M. de Lesdiguières. It would be good for the soul of the King's Lieutenant to hear the undiluted truth about himself for once.

"It is the system itself you must attack and overthrow, not a mere instrument. Precipitancy will spoil everything. Above all, my children, no violence!"

My children! If only his godfather could have heard him!

"You have seen the result of premature violence elsewhere in Brittany and France. Violence on your part will call for violence on theirs. They will welcome the chance to assert their mastery with a firmer grip. The military will be sent for, and you will face the bayonets of mercenaries. Do not provoke that, I implore you. Do not give them the pretext they welcome to crush you down into the mud of your own blood."

Out of the silence broke a cry. "What else, then? What else?"

"I will tell you," he answered. "The wealth and strength of Brittany lie in Nantes, a bourgeois city made prosperous by the energy of the bourgeoisie and the toil of the people. This movement began in Nantes, resulting in the King's order dissolving the States as now constituted. Those who base their power on Privilege and Abuse do not hesitate to thwart this order. Let Nantes be informed of the precise situation, and let nothing be done here until Nantes has given us the lead. She has the power to make her will prevail. Let her exert that power once more, and until she does, keep the peace in Rennes. Thus shall you triumph. Thus shall the outrages perpetrated under your eyes be fully avenged."

As abruptly as he had leapt upon the plinth, he leapt down. He had finished. He had said all that could have been said by his dead friend. But the crowd would not let him extinguish himself. The thunder of their acclamations rose deafeningly. He had played upon their emotions like a skillful harpist, leaving them vibrant with the passions he had aroused and the high note of hope on which he closed his symphony.

A dozen students caught him as he leapt down and swung him to their shoulders. The delicate Le Chapelier pressed alongside him with a flushed face and shining eyes.

"My lad," he said, "you have kindled a fire today that will sweep the face of France in a blaze of liberty." He then issued a sharp command to the students. "To the Literary Chamber at once. We must concert measures instantly. A delegate must be dispatched to Nantes to convey the message of the people of Rennes."

The crowd fell back, opening a lane through which the students bore the hero of the hour. Waving his hands, he called upon them to disperse to their homes and await in patience what must follow very soon.

"You have endured for centuries with a fortitude that is a pattern to the world," he flattered them. "Endure a little longer yet. The end, my friends, is well in sight at last."

They carried him out of the square and up the Rue Royale to an old house. In an upper chamber lighted by yellow glass panes, the Literary Chamber held its meetings. Members came hurrying in, summoned by Le Chapelier's messages.

Behind closed doors, a flushed group of some fifty men hailed André-Louis as the strayed sheep returning to the fold, smothering him in congratulations.

They settled down to deliberate upon immediate measures, while a self-improvised guard of honor kept the doors below. This was very necessary, as the house was soon assailed by the gendarmerie of M. de Lesdiguières, dispatched to arrest the firebrand inciting the people to sedition. The force consisted of fifty men. Five hundred would have been too few. The mob broke their carbines and heads, beating them into a well-advised retreat.

While that took place in the street below, the eloquent Le Chapelier addressed his colleagues upstairs. With no bullets to fear and no one to report his words, his oratory flowed unintimidated. He praised the vigor and greatness of Moreau's speech, above all its wisdom. Moreau's words had surprised them, as he was previously known only as a bitter critic of their reforms. But they understood his conversion. The murder of their dear colleague Vilmorin had produced this change. Today he had proven himself their stoutest apostle. Let them pack like wolves, and send a delegate to Nantes to ensure uniform action. He invited them to elect the delegate.

André-Louis, on a bench near the window, a prey to reaction, listened in bewilderment.

As the applause died down, a voice exclaimed, "I propose we appoint our leader here, Le Chapelier, to be that delegate."

Le Chapelier reared his elegantly dressed head, revealing a pale countenance. Nervously, he fingered a gold spy-glass.

"My friends," he said slowly, "I am deeply sensible of the honor. But in accepting it, I should usurp an honor belonging elsewhere. Who could represent us better than the champion who has so incomparably given utterance to the voice of this great city? Confer this honor upon André-Louis Moreau."

Rising in response to the storm of applause, André-Louis bowed and yielded. "Be it so," he said simply. "It is perhaps fitting that I carry out what I have begun. I will set out tonight."

"You will set out at once, my lad," Le Chapelier informed him, revealing the true source of his generosity. "It is not safe for you to linger an hour in Rennes. You must go secretly. M. de Lesdiguières will have you laid by the heels, and it will be good-night for you."
