For the second time that day, Andre-Louis set out for the chateau. He walked quickly and ignored the curious eyes that followed him through the village. He also ignored the whispers of the people. They were all excited by the day's event, and they knew he had been a part of it.

Benoit, the elderly servant who was grandly called the seneschal, showed him into the ground-floor room. People traditionally called this room the library. It still contained several shelves of neglected books, which gave the room its name. However, hunting equipment like shotguns, powder horns, hunting bags, and sheath knives were much more noticeable than any study materials. The furniture was massive and made of richly carved oak from a past age. Great massive oak beams crossed the rather high whitewashed ceiling.

The short, stout Lord of Gavrillac was pacing restlessly when Andre-Louis entered. The lord announced at once that he already knew what had happened at the Breton armory. He said that Monsieur de Chabrillane had just left him, and he confessed that he was deeply grieved and very confused.

He bowed his enormous head and said, "It is such a pity! He was such an admirable young man, and he was so full of promise. Ah, this La Tour d'Azyr is a hard man, and he feels very strongly about these matters. He might be right. I do not know. I have never killed a man for having different opinions from mine. In fact, I have never killed a man at all. It is not in my nature. I would not be able to sleep at night if I did. But men are built differently."

Andre-Louis was quite calm and collected, but his face was very pale. He said, "The question, my godfather, is what we must do now."

Monsieur de Kercadiou stared at him blankly with his pale eyes.

He asked, "Why, what is there to do? From what I heard, Vilmorin went so far as to strike the Marquis."

Andre-Louis replied, "He did that under the most extreme provocation."

"But he provoked that himself with his revolutionary language! The poor boy's head was full of that encyclopedia trash. That comes from reading too much. I have never placed much value on books, Andre. I have never seen anything but trouble come from learning. It unsettles a man. It complicates his views on life, and it destroys the simplicity that brings peace of mind and happiness. Let this miserable affair be a warning to you, Andre. You are too eager yourself to explore these new theories about changing the social order. You see what happens as a result. A fine, admirable young man forgets himself. He forgets his position and his duty to his widowed mother, who has no one else to support her. He forgets everything, and he goes and gets himself killed like this. It is terribly sad. Upon my soul, it is sad." He pulled out a handkerchief and blew his nose loudly.

Andre-Louis felt a tightness in his heart. The hopes he had placed on his godfather were never very high, but now they faded even more.

He said, "Your criticisms are all aimed at the actions of the dead man, and you have none for the murderer. It is impossible that you could sympathize with such a crime."

Monsieur de Kercadiou shrieked, "Crime? My God, boy, you are talking about Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr!"

Andre-Louis said, "I am talking about him, and the horrible murder he has committed."

Monsieur de Kercadiou spoke very firmly. He said, "Stop! I cannot allow you to use such words about him. I cannot permit it. The Marquis is my friend, and we will likely become even closer relatives very soon."

Andre-Louis asked, "Even after this?"

Monsieur de Kercadiou was clearly impatient.

He said, "Why, what does this have to do with it? I might regret it. But I have no right to condemn it. That is a common way for gentlemen to settle their differences."

Andre-Louis asked, "Do you really believe that?"

Monsieur de Kercadiou replied, "What exactly are you implying, Andre? Would I say something that I do not believe? You are starting to make me angry."

Andre-Louis said, "'Thou shalt not kill' is the King's law as well as God's law."

Monsieur de Kercadiou said, "I think you are determined to argue with me. It was a duel."

Andre-Louis interrupted him and said, "It was no more a duel than if they had fought with pistols and only the Marquis's weapon was loaded. He invited Philippe to discuss the matter further with the clear intention of forcing an argument and killing him. Please be patient with me, my godfather. I am not telling you what I imagine, but what the Marquis himself admitted to me."

Monsieur de Kercadiou was a little overwhelmed by the young man's seriousness, and he looked away. He turned with a shrug and walked slowly over to the window.

He said, "We would need a court of honor to decide such a matter. And we do not have courts of honor."

Andre-Louis said, "But we have courts of justice."

The lord turned around to face him again with returning irritation. He asked, "And what court of justice do you think would listen to the kind of argument you seem to have in mind?"

Andre-Louis said, "There is the court of the King's Lieutenant at Rennes."

Monsieur de Kercadiou asked, "And do you think the King's Lieutenant would listen to you?"

Andre-Louis replied, "Perhaps he would not listen to me, sir. But if you were to bring the complaint to him..."

Monsieur de Kercadiou's pale eyes grew wide with horror at the suggestion. He repeated, "I bring the complaint?"

Andre-Louis pointed out, "The event happened here on your land."

Monsieur de Kercadiou said, "You expect me to bring a complaint against Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr! I think you have lost your mind. Oh, you are crazy. You are just as crazy as that poor friend of yours who died because he interfered in things that were none of his business. The language he used here to the Marquis about Mabey was incredibly insulting. Perhaps you did not know that. It does not surprise me at all that the Marquis wanted to defend his honor."

Andre-Louis spoke with a feeling of hopelessness. He said, "I understand."

Monsieur de Kercadiou demanded, "You understand? What on earth do you understand?"

Andre-Louis answered, "I see that I will have to rely only on myself."

Monsieur de Kercadiou asked, "And what exactly do you plan to do, if I may ask?"

Andre-Louis said, "I will go to Rennes, and I will present the facts to the King's Lieutenant."

Monsieur de Kercadiou replied, "He will be too busy to see you." His mind jumped around a bit, as weak minds often do. "There is already enough trouble in Rennes because of this crazy States-General. Our wonderful Monsieur Necker is supposed to use it to fix the kingdom's finances. As if a lowly Swiss bank clerk, who is also a cursed Protestant, could succeed where great men like Calonne and Brienne have failed."

Andre-Louis said, "Good afternoon, my godfather."

Monsieur de Kercadiou demanded in a complaining tone, "Where are you going?"

Andre-Louis replied, "I am going home for now. I will go to Rennes in the morning."

The short, stout man rolled forward. His large, ugly face showed affectionate concern, and he placed one of his chubby hands on his godson's shoulder. He reasoned with him and said, "Wait, boy, wait! Now listen to me, Andre. This is pure knight-errantry. It is nonsense and lunacy. You will get nothing good out of this if you continue. You have read 'Don Quixote', and you know what happened to him when he tried to fight windmills. That is exactly what will happen to you, neither more nor less. Leave things the way they are, my boy. I do not want any harm to come to you."

Andre-Louis looked at him and smiled weakly.

He said, "I swore an oath today. I would damn my soul if I broke it."

Monsieur de Kercadiou bristled again, since he was impulsive and inconsistent. He said, "Do you mean that you will go despite anything I might say? Very well, then, go! Go to the devil!"

Andre-Louis said, "I will begin with the King's Lieutenant."

The lord yelled in anger, "And if you get into the trouble you are looking for, do not come crying to me for help! Since you choose to disobey me, you can go smash your empty head against the windmill, and be damned."

Andre-Louis bowed with a hint of irony and walked to the door.

From the doorway, he said, "If the windmill proves to be too difficult to fight, I might see what I can do with the wind itself. Goodbye, my godfather."

He was gone. Monsieur de Kercadiou was left alone, and his face was purple. He tried to figure out the meaning of that last mysterious comment. He was not at all happy, either about his godson or about Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr. He felt angry at both of them. He found these stubborn, strong-willed men who relentlessly followed their own impulses to be very disturbing and irritating. He loved his comfort, and he wanted to live in peace with his neighbors. To him, peace seemed so clearly to be the greatest good in life. Because of this, he considered anyone who bothered to seek other things to be a fool.
