CHAPTER 9. THE AFTERMATH

Dusk was falling the following day when Andre-Louis approached Gavrillac. He knew there would soon be a massive manhunt for the revolutionary who had summoned the people of Nantes to arms. He wanted to hide the fact that he had been in that maritime city. Because of this, he took a wide detour. He crossed the river at Bruz and crossed it again just above Chavagne to approach Gavrillac from the north. This would make it look like he was returning from Rennes, where people knew he had gone two days ago.

When he was about a mile from the village, the fading light revealed someone on horseback riding slowly toward him. He did not pay much attention until they were just a few yards apart. Then he noticed the cloaked figure leaning forward to look closely at him. A woman's voice immediately called out.

"It is you, Andre, at last!"

He stopped his horse. He was slightly surprised when she asked another question with anxious impatience.

"Where have you been?"

"Where have I been, Cousin Aline? Oh, just seeing the world."

"I have been patrolling this road since noon waiting for you," she explained breathlessly. "A troop of police from Rennes came to Gavrillac this morning looking for you. They searched the chateau and the village completely. Finally, they found out you were supposed to return with a horse hired from the Breton Arme. Now they are waiting for you at the inn. I have been watching all afternoon to warn you before you walk into their trap."

"My dear Aline! I hate that I caused you so much worry and trouble."

"Never mind that. It is not important."

"Actually, it is the most important part of your news. The rest does not matter."

"Do you understand that they are here to arrest you?" she asked with growing impatience. "You are wanted for sedition under a warrant from Monsieur de Lesdiguieres."

"Sedition?" he asked. His mind immediately went to the events in Nantes. It seemed impossible that they could have heard the news in Rennes and acted so quickly.

"Yes, sedition. They want you for that wicked speech you gave in Rennes on Wednesday."

"Oh, that!" he said. "Pooh!" If she had been paying closer attention, his obvious relief would have told her he was fearing the consequences of a much greater crime committed later. "Why, that was nothing."

"Nothing?"

"I almost suspect we have misunderstood the real intentions of these police officers. They probably came to thank me on behalf of Monsieur de Lesdiguieres. I stopped the people when they wanted to burn down the Palais with him inside it."

"You only stopped them after you incited them in the first place. I suppose you became afraid of what you had started. You backed down at the last minute. But if the reports are correct, you said things about Monsieur de Lesdiguieres that he will never forgive."

"I see," Andre-Louis said, falling silent as he thought.

Mademoiselle de Kercadiou had already done all the necessary thinking. Her sharp young mind had figured out exactly what they needed to do.

"You must not go into Gavrillac," she told him. "Get down from your horse and let me take it. I will keep it in the chateau stables tonight. Sometime tomorrow afternoon, when you are far away, I will return it to the Breton Arme."

"Oh, but that is impossible."

"Impossible? Why?"

"There are several reasons. First, you have not considered what will happen to you if you do this."

"To me? Do you think I am afraid of Monsieur de Lesdiguieres' clumsy guards? I have not committed sedition."

"But helping a wanted criminal is almost as bad. That is the law."

"What do I care about the law? Do you really think the law will dare touch me?"

"Of course, there is that. You are protected by one of the very abuses I complained about in Rennes. I forgot."

"You can complain about it all you want, but you should take advantage of it now. Come on, Andre. Do as I tell you and get down from your horse." When he still hesitated, she reached out and grabbed his arm. Her voice was trembling with sincerity. "Andre, you do not realize how serious this is. If these people catch you, they will almost certainly hang you. Do you understand? You cannot go to Gavrillac. You must leave immediately and hide until this blows over. You need to stay hidden until my uncle can use his influence to get you a pardon."

"That will take a long time then," Andre-Louis said. "Monsieur de Kercadiou has never made friends at court."

"We have Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr," she reminded him. He was completely astonished.

"That man!" he cried, and then he laughed. "But he is the main reason I stirred up the people of Rennes! I should have guessed they did not tell you everything I said."

"They told me everything, including that part."

"Ah! Yet you still want to save me. I am the man trying to get your future husband killed by either the law or the people. Or maybe you changed your mind about becoming the Marquise de La Tour d'Azyr after seeing his true nature when he murdered poor Philippe?"

"You frequently show that you have no logic at all."

"Maybe so. But I am not foolish enough to think Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr will ever lift a finger to help me."

"As usual, you are wrong. He will certainly do it if I ask him."

"If you ask him?" Sheer horror filled his voice.

"Why, yes. You see, I have not actually agreed to be the Marquise de La Tour d'Azyr yet. I am still thinking about it. The position does have its benefits. One of them is that it guarantees a suitor will do whatever I say."

"So, I see how your crooked logic works. You might actually tell him to either help me or you will refuse to marry him. You would go that far?"

"If I had to, yes."

"Do you not see what that implies? Your hands would be tied. It would be dishonorable for you to refuse him after he helped me. Do you think I would ever agree to anything that forces you into that? Do you think I want to see you ruined, Aline?"

Her hand dropped from his arm.

"Oh, you are mad!" she exclaimed, losing all patience.

"Possibly. But I enjoy my madness. It brings a thrill that your perfect sanity could never understand. With your permission, Aline, I believe I will just ride on to Gavrillac."

"Andre, you must not! They will kill you!" In her panic, she backed her horse up and pulled it across the road to block his way.

It was completely dark by now. However, a crescent moon slipped out from behind the clouds to offer a little light.

"Come now," she urged him. "Be reasonable. Do what I say. Look, a carriage is coming up behind you. We should not be found together like this."

He made his decision quickly. He was not one to act like a false hero about dying, and he had no desire to swing from Monsieur de Lesdiguieres' gallows. He had accomplished his immediate goal. He had made sure the voice Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr thought he silenced was heard loudly and clearly. But he was definitely not ready to die.

"Aline, I will do it on one condition."

"What is it?"

"You must swear that you will never ask Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr to help me."

"Since you insist and we are out of time, I agree. Now ride with me as far as the lane. That carriage is getting closer."

The lane she meant branched off the road about three hundred yards away. It led straight up the hill to the chateau. They rode toward it in silence and turned into the narrow path bordered by thick hedges. When they had gone about fifty yards, she told him to stop.

"Now!" she ordered.

He obediently climbed down from his horse and handed her the reins.

"Aline," he said, "I do not have the words to thank you."

"It is not necessary," she said.

"But I hope to repay you someday."

"That is also not necessary. How could I do anything less? I do not want to see you hanged, Andre. Neither does my uncle, even though he is furious with you."

"I imagine he is."

"You can hardly blame him. You were his delegate and his representative. He trusted you, and you betrayed him. He is rightfully angry. He calls you a traitor and swears he will never speak to you again. But he does not want you hanged, Andre."

"Then we agree on that at least, because I do not want it either."

"I will make peace with him for you. Now, goodbye, Andre. Send me word when you are safe."

She held out a hand that looked ghostly pale in the dim light. He took it and kissed it.

"God bless you, Aline."

She rode away, and he stood listening to her horse's hooves until the sound faded into the distance. Then, with hunched shoulders and his head bowed, he slowly walked back toward the main road to think about where he should go. He suddenly stopped in his tracks, horrified to remember he had almost no money. He knew of no safe hiding places in Brittany. As long as he stayed in the province, he was in constant danger. To leave the province quickly, he would need horses. But how could he get horses with just a single gold coin and a few silver pieces?

He was also incredibly tired. He had slept very little since Tuesday night. He had spent most of his time in the saddle, which was exhausting for someone not used to long rides. In his worn-out state, it was impossible to go far tonight. He might be able to reach Chavagne. However, he would have to buy dinner and a bed there, leaving him with even less for tomorrow.

If he had thought of it sooner, Aline probably would have loaned him some money. His first instinct was to follow her to the chateau. But caution changed his mind. Servants would see him before he could reach her, and word of his presence would spread.

He had no other choice. He would have to walk to Chavagne, find a bed, and worry about tomorrow when morning came. Having made up his mind, he turned back the way he had come. But then he stopped again. Chavagne was on the road to Rennes, so going that way meant walking right back into danger. He decided to head south instead. There was a ferry at the edge of some meadows near the village that would take him across the river. This would help him avoid the village completely. Putting the river between himself and the immediate danger would make him feel much safer.

A lane turned off the main road about a quarter-mile before Gavrillac. About twenty minutes later, Andre-Louis dragged his tired feet down this path toward the ferry. He stayed away from the ferryman's cottage, where a light shone in the window. He crept down to the boat in the dark, hoping to pull himself across the river. He felt along the mooring chain until he found where it was tied. To his disappointment, he found a padlock.

He stood in the darkness and laughed quietly to himself. He should have expected this. The ferry belonged to Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr. He would never leave it unlocked for poor people to cross without paying his fees.

With no other options, he walked back to the cottage and knocked on the door. When it opened, he stepped back and away from the light shining from inside.

"Ferry!" he said sharply.

The ferryman was a large, rough man Andre-Louis knew well. He turned to grab a lantern and came outside as ordered. When he stepped off the porch, he lifted the lantern so the light illuminated the traveler's face.

"My God!" the man gasped.

"I assume you realize I am in a hurry," Andre-Louis said, watching the man's shocked face.

"You should be in a hurry with the gallows waiting for you in Rennes," the ferryman growled. "Since you were foolish enough to come back to Gavrillac, you had better leave as fast as you can. I will pretend I never saw you."

"Thank you, Fresnel. Your advice matches my plans perfectly. That is why I need the boat."

"Ah, no, absolutely not," Fresnel said firmly. "I will keep quiet, but my life is worth too much to risk helping you."

"You did not have to see my face. Just forget that you saw it."

"I will do that, monsieur. But that is all I will do. I cannot take you across the river."

"Then give me the key to the boat, and I will take myself across."

"That is exactly the same thing. I cannot do it. I will keep my mouth shut, but I will not and dare not help you."

Andre-Louis looked at the man's angry, stubborn face for a moment and understood. The man lived under the terrifying shadow of La Tour d'Azyr. He would never dare do anything that went against his lord's wishes.

"Fresnel," he said calmly, "if I am truly facing the gallows as you say, it is because of what happened to Mabey. If Mabey had not been murdered, I would never have needed to speak out like I did. I believe Mabey was your friend. Will you help me save my life for his sake?"

The man looked away, and the angry frown deepened on his face.

"I would if I dared, but I cannot." Then he suddenly grew angry. He seemed to use his anger to defend himself. "Do you not understand that I am afraid? Why should a poor man risk his life for you? What have you or your family ever done for me to ask such a thing? You are not crossing on my ferry tonight. Understand that, monsieur, and leave right now. Go before I remember that even talking to you without reporting it might be dangerous. Go!"

He turned around to go back inside his cottage, and Andre-Louis felt a wave of complete hopelessness.

But the feeling vanished a second later. He had to force the man to help him, and he knew how to do it. He remembered a pistol Le Chapelier had pressed into his hand right before he left Rennes. He had almost refused the gift at the time. It was true the gun was not loaded and he had no ammunition. But Fresnel did not know that.

He moved quickly. He pulled the pistol from his pocket with his right hand. At the same time, he grabbed the ferryman's shoulder with his left hand and spun him around.

"What do you want now?" Fresnel demanded angrily. "Did I not tell you that I..."

He stopped mid-sentence. The barrel of the pistol was pointing right between his eyes.

"I want the key to the boat. That is all, Fresnel. You can either hand it over now, or I will take it after I blow your brains out. I would hate to kill you, but I will not hesitate. It is your life against mine, Fresnel. You cannot blame me for preferring you to die instead of me."

Fresnel reached into his pocket and pulled out a key. His fingers were shaking more from anger than fear as he handed it to Andre-Louis.

"I am giving in to violence," he snarled like a dog. "But do not think this will do you much good."

Andre-Louis took the key, keeping his pistol aimed at the man.

"I believe you are threatening me," he said. "It is easy to figure out what you mean. The moment I leave, you will run to the police. You will send them right after me."

"No, no!" the man cried. He finally realized the danger he was in. The cold, dark tone in Andre-Louis's voice terrified him. "I swear to you, monsieur, I have no intention of doing that."

"I think I better make absolutely sure of you."

"Oh my God! Have mercy, monsieur!" The villain was trembling with terror. "I mean you no harm. I swear to Heaven I mean no harm. I will not say a single word. I will not..."

"I would rather trust your silence than your promises. However, I will give you a chance. I am probably a fool, but I hate shedding blood. Go into the house, Fresnel. Go on, man. I am right behind you."

Andre-Louis stopped him again in the shabby main room of the house. "Get me a piece of rope," he ordered, and the man quickly obeyed.

Five minutes later, Fresnel was tied tightly to a chair. He was also gagged with a block of wood and a scarf, making it impossible for him to make a sound.

Andre-Louis turned around at the doorway as he left.

"Goodnight, Fresnel," he said. The man's angry eyes glared at him in silent hatred. "I doubt anyone will need your ferry again tonight. But someone will definitely come to relieve you early in the morning. Until then, bear your discomfort as best you can. Remember that your own lack of charity brought this on yourself entirely. If you spend the night thinking about that, maybe you will learn a lesson. By morning, you might even feel charitable enough to forget who tied you up. Goodnight."

He stepped outside and closed the door.

It took him only six or seven minutes to unlock the ferry and pull himself across the fast-moving river. The faint moonlight made silver ripples on the water. He pushed the nose of the boat into the rotting weeds along the southern bank, jumped onto the shore, and tied the small boat securely. He missed the footpath in the dark and had to stumble across a soggy meadow to find the road.
