Chapter 3. The Eloquence of Monsieur de Vilmorin

As they walked down the hill together, Monsieur de Vilmorin was now silent and preoccupied, while André-Louis was talkative. He had chosen women as the subject for his current discourse. He unjustifiably claimed to have discovered women that morning, and the things he had to say about the sex were unflattering and occasionally almost gross. Monsieur de Vilmorin realized what the subject was and stopped listening. It may seem unusual for a young French abbé of his time, but Monsieur de Vilmorin was not interested in women. Poor Philippe was exceptional in several ways. Opposite the Breton Arm, which was the inn and posting-house at the entrance of the village of Gavrillac, Monsieur de Vilmorin interrupted his companion just as he was soaring to the dizziest heights of caustic insults. This brought André-Louis back to reality, and he noticed the carriage of the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr standing before the door of the inn.

"I do not believe you have been listening to me," he said.

"If you had been less interested in what you were saying, you might have noticed it sooner and spared your breath. The truth is that you disappoint me, André. You seem to have forgotten why we went there. I have an appointment here with the Marquis. He desires to hear me further on the matter. I could accomplish nothing up there at Gavrillac. The time happened to be poorly chosen. But I have hopes for the Marquis."

"Hopes for what?"

"I hope that he will make whatever reparation lies in his power and provide for the widow and the orphans. Why else would he desire to hear me further?"

"That is unusual condescension," André-Louis said, and he quoted, "I fear the Greeks, even when they bring gifts."

"Why?" Philippe asked.

"Let us go and find out, unless you think that I shall be in the way."

The host ushered the young men into a room on the right, which was kept private for the Marquis as long as he chose to honor it. A fire of logs was burning brightly at the far end of the room. The Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr and his cousin, the Chevalier de Chabrillane, sat beside it. Both men rose as Monsieur de Vilmorin came in. André-Louis followed him and paused to close the door.

"You oblige me by your prompt courtesy, Monsieur de Vilmorin," the Marquis said. His tone was so cold that it contradicted the politeness of his words. "Please take a chair. Ah, Moreau?" His tone was frigidly questioning. "He accompanies you, sir?" he asked.

"If you please, Marquis."

"Why not? Find yourself a seat, Moreau." He spoke over his shoulder as if talking to a servant.

"It is good of you, sir," Philippe said, "to offer me this opportunity to continue the subject that took me so fruitlessly to Gavrillac."

The Marquis crossed his legs and held one of his fine hands to the fire. He replied without bothering to turn to the young man, who was slightly behind him.

"We will leave the goodness of my request out of the question for the moment," he said darkly, and Monsieur de Chabrillane laughed. André-Louis thought the Chevalier was easily moved to laughter and almost envied his ability.

"But I am grateful," Philippe insisted, "that you condescend to hear me plead their cause."

The Marquis stared at him over his shoulder. "Whose cause?" he asked.

"Why, the cause of the widow and orphans of this unfortunate Mabey."

The Marquis looked from Vilmorin to the Chevalier, and the Chevalier laughed again and slapped his leg this time.

I think," the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr said slowly, "that we misunderstand each other. I asked you to come here. The Chateau de Gavrillac was not a good place to continue our talk. Also, I did not want to trouble you. It would have been a long trip for you to Azyr. But my purpose is connected to certain expressions that you used up there. I want to hear more about those expressions. Sir, please tell me more.

André-Louis began to realize that there was something sinister in the air. He was a man of quick intuition, far quicker than Monsieur de Vilmorin, who showed no more than a mild surprise.

"I am confused, sir," he said. "What expressions are you referring to?"

It seems that I must refresh your memory, sir." The Marquis crossed his legs. He swung sideways on his chair. Now he faced Monsieur de Vilmorin directly. "You spoke very eloquently, sir. Even if you were mistaken, you spoke almost too eloquently. You talked about the infamy of a certain deed. This was an act of summary justice. It was done to this thieving fellow Mabey, or whatever his name may be. Infamy was the precise word you used. You did not take back that word. I told you that my gamekeeper Benet acted under my orders.

"If the deed was infamous," Monsieur de Vilmorin said, "its infamy is not lessened by the rank of the person responsible, no matter how exalted. Rather, it is worsened."

"Ah!" the Marquis said, and he drew a gold snuffbox from his pocket. "You say 'if the deed was infamous,' sir. Am I to understand that you are no longer as convinced of its infamy as you appeared to be?"

Monsieur de Vilmorin's handsome face wore a look of confusion. He did not understand the direction of this conversation.

"It occurs to me, Marquis, in view of your readiness to assume responsibility, that you must believe there is a justification for the deed that is not apparent to me."

That is better. That is distinctly better." The Marquis took snuff delicately. He dusted the fragments from the fine lace at his throat. "You must realize this. You may have jumped to unfair conclusions. This is because you do not fully understand these matters. Also, you are not a landowner yourself. That is indeed the case. May it be a warning to you, sir. Similar thefts have annoyed me for months. When I tell you that, you will perhaps understand. It became necessary to use a strong deterrent. This was to stop them. I do not think anyone will prowl in my woods anymore. They now know the risk. And there is more to it than that, Monsieur de Vilmorin. The poaching does not annoy me as much as the contempt for my absolute and undeniable rights. You must have noticed something, sir. There is an evil spirit of disobedience in the air. There is only one way to deal with it. We cannot tolerate it even slightly. We cannot show any leniency. If we do, we will need even harsher measures tomorrow. I am sure you understand me. I am also sure you appreciate my explanation. It is condescending of me to explain. I cannot admit that I owed you any explanations. If anything I have said is still unclear to you, I refer you to the game laws. Your lawyer friend there will explain them to you if necessary.

The gentleman swung around again to face the fire. He seemed to imply that the interview was over. However, this was not the message it conveyed to the watchful, puzzled, and vaguely uneasy André-Louis. He thought it was a very curious and suspicious speech. It pretended to explain things. It used polite words and a deliberately insolent tone. This could only provoke a man with Monsieur de Vilmorin's opinions. And that is exactly what it did. He stood up.

"Are there no laws in the world but game laws?" he demanded angrily. "Have you never heard of the laws of humanity by any chance?"

The Marquis sighed wearily. "What do I have to do with the laws of humanity?" he wondered.

Monsieur de Vilmorin looked at him for a moment in speechless amazement.

"Nothing, Marquis. That is unfortunately too obvious. I hope you will remember it when you wish to appeal to those same laws that you now mock."

The Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr threw his head back sharply, and his aristocratic face looked commanding.

"Now what exactly does that mean? It is not the first time today that you have used dark phrases that I could almost interpret as a veiled threat."

"It is not a threat, Marquis, but a warning. It is a warning that such deeds against God's creatures... Oh, you may sneer, sir, but they are God's creatures, just like you or me. This is neither more nor less true, even though the thought may deeply wound your pride. In His eyes..."

"Out of charity, spare me a sermon, Monsieur l'abbé!"

"You mock me, sir. You laugh. I wonder if you will laugh when God presents His reckoning to you for the blood and plunder that fill your hands?"

"Sir!" The word came sharp as the crack of a whip from Monsieur de Chabrillane, who leaped to his feet. But the Marquis instantly stopped him.

"Sit down, Chevalier. You are interrupting the abbé, and I would like to hear him further. He interests me profoundly."

In the background, André-Louis had also stood up, alarmed by the evil he saw written on the handsome face of the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr. He approached his friend and touched his arm.

"We had better go, Philippe," he said.

But Monsieur de Vilmorin was caught in the relentless grip of passions he had repressed for a long time. He was being carried along recklessly.

"Oh, sir," he said, "consider what you are and what you will be. Consider how you and your kind live by abuses, and consider the harvest that these abuses must ultimately bring."

"Revolutionist!" the Marquis said contemptuously. "You have the nerve to stand before me and offer this foul hypocritical nonsense from your modern so-called intellectuals!"

"Is it nonsense, sir? Do you think and believe in your soul that it is nonsense? Is it nonsense that the feudal grip is on all living things, crushing them like grapes in a press for its own profit? Does it not exercise its rights on the river waters, on the fire that bakes the poor man's bread of grass and barley. On the wind that turns the mill? The peasant cannot take a step on the road, cross a rickety bridge over a river, or buy a yard of cloth in the village market without facing feudal greed and being taxed in feudal dues. Is that not enough, Marquis? Must you also demand his wretched life in payment for the slightest violation of your sacred privileges, uncaring of the widows or orphans you plunge into misery? Will nothing satisfy you unless your shadow lies like a curse across the land? And do you proudly think that France, this suffering nation, will endure it forever?"

He paused as if waiting for an answer. But none came. The Marquis looked at him in strange silence. A faint smile of disdain touched the corners of his lips, and there was an ominous hardness in his eyes.

André-Louis tugged at his friend's sleeve again.

"Philippe."

Philippe shook him off and plunged on fanatically.

"Do you see nothing of the gathering clouds that signal the coming storm? You perhaps imagine that the States-General called by Monsieur Necker, which is promised for next year, will only invent new ways of extortion to pay off the bankruptcy of the State? You deceive yourselves, and you will soon find out. You despise the Third Estate. It will prove to be the dominant force, and it will find a way to destroy this disease of privilege that is eating away at the heart of this unfortunate country."

The Marquis shifted in his chair and finally spoke.

"You have a very dangerous gift of eloquence, sir," he said. "And it reflects more on you than on your subject. After all, what are you offering me? You offer a reheated version of the ideas served to poor enthusiasts in provincial literary clubs, mixed with the writings of your Voltaires and Jean-Jacques and similar dirty-fingered writers. Not one among all your philosophers has the intelligence to understand that we are an order established by antiquity. That we have the authority of centuries behind our rights and privileges."

"Humanity, sir," Philippe replied, "is older than nobility. Human rights are as old as mankind itself."

The Marquis laughed and shrugged.

"That is the answer I might have expected. It has the exact tone of hypocritical nonsense that distinguishes the philosophers."

And then Monsieur de Chabrillane spoke.

"You are taking a very long way around," he criticized his cousin with a note of impatience.

"But I am getting there," the Marquis answered. "I wanted to be absolutely certain first."

"By my faith, you should have no doubt by now."

"I have none." The Marquis stood up and turned back to Monsieur de Vilmorin, who had understood nothing of that brief exchange. "Monsieur l'abbé," he said once more, "you have a very dangerous gift of eloquence. I can imagine men being swayed by it. If you had been born a gentleman, you would not have so easily acquired these false views that you express."

Monsieur de Vilmorin stared blankly, unable to understand.

"Did you say if I had been born a gentleman?" he asked in a slow and bewildered voice. "But I was born a gentleman. My family is as old and my blood is as good as yours, sir."

The Marquis slightly raised his eyebrows and gave a vague and indulgent smile. His dark and liquid eyes looked directly into the face of Monsieur de Vilmorin.

"I am afraid you have been deceived about that."

"Deceived?"

"Your sentiments reveal the indiscretion that your mother must have committed."

The brutally insulting words were spoken beyond recall. The lips that had uttered them coldly, as if stating the most ordinary fact, remained calm and faintly sneering.

A dead silence followed. André-Louis's mind went numb. He stood horrified, and all thought stopped within him. Meanwhile, Monsieur de Vilmorin kept his eyes fixed on the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr, as if searching for a meaning that escaped him. Quite suddenly, he understood the vile insult. The blood rushed to his face, and fire blazed in his gentle eyes. A convulsive tremor shook his body. Then, with an inarticulate cry, he leaned forward and struck the Marquis hard on his sneering face with his open hand.

In a flash, Monsieur de Chabrillane was on his feet between the two men.

André-Louis saw the trap too late. La Tour d'Azyr's words were just a move in a game of chess. They were calculated to anger his opponent into making a counter-move like this, which left him entirely at the other man's mercy.

The Marquis looked on. He was very pale, except where Monsieur de Vilmorin's fingerprints slowly began to color his face, but he said nothing more. Instead, it was Monsieur de Chabrillane who now did the talking, taking up his prearranged part in this wicked game.

"You realize what you have done, sir," he said coldly to Philippe. "And you realize, of course, what must inevitably follow."

Monsieur de Vilmorin had realized nothing. The poor young man had acted on impulse and out of an instinct for decency and honor, without ever considering the consequences. But he realized them now at the sinister invitation of Monsieur de Chabrillane. He wanted to avoid these consequences out of respect for his priestly calling, which strictly forbade the kind of duel that Monsieur de Chabrillane was clearly forcing upon him.

He stepped back. "Let one insult wipe out the other," he said in a dull voice. "The balance is still in the Marquis's favor. Let that satisfy him."

"Impossible." The Chevalier's lips pressed tightly together. After that, he was completely smooth but very firm. "A blow has been struck, sir. I believe I am correct in saying that such a thing has never happened to the Marquis in his entire life. If you felt insulted, you only had to ask for the satisfaction due from one gentleman to another. Your action seems to confirm the assumption that you found so offensive. But that does not make you immune from the consequences."

You see, it was Monsieur de Chabrillane's role to throw fuel on this fire and make absolutely sure that their victim could not escape them.

"I desire no immunity," the young seminarian snapped back, stung by this fresh provocation. After all, he was of noble birth, and the traditions of his class strongly influenced him. They were far stronger than his seminary training in humility. He owed it to himself and his honor to be killed rather than avoid the consequences of what he had done.

"But he does not wear a sword, gentlemen!" André-Louis cried out in horror.

"That is easily fixed. He may borrow mine."

"I mean, gentlemen," André-Louis insisted, caught between fear for his friend and indignation, "that it is not his habit to wear a sword. He has never worn one, and he is untrained in its use. He is a seminarian and a candidate for holy orders. He is already half a priest, and he is therefore forbidden from taking part in the kind of fight you propose."

"He should have remembered all that before he struck a blow," Monsieur de Chabrillane said politely.

"The blow was deliberately provoked!" André-Louis raged. Then he regained control of himself, although the other man's haughty stare played no part in his recovery. "Oh my God, I talk in vain! How can one argue against a plan that has already been decided! Come away, Philippe. Do you not see the trap?"

Monsieur de Vilmorin cut him short and pushed him away. "Be quiet, André. The Marquis is entirely in the right."

"The Marquis is in the right?" André-Louis let his arms fall helplessly. This man whom he loved more than anyone else in the world was caught in the trap of the world's madness. He was offering his chest to the knife for the sake of a vague and distorted sense of his own honor. It was not that he failed to see the trap. It was that his honor forced him to refuse to consider it. In that moment, he seemed to André-Louis to be a uniquely tragic figure. He was perhaps noble, but he was very pitiful.
