CHAPTER V. THE LORD OF GAVRILLAC

For the second time that day Andre-Louis set out for the chateau,
walking briskly, and heeding not at all the curious eyes that followed
him through the village, and the whisperings that marked his passage
through the people, all agog by now with that day’s event in which he
had been an actor.

He was ushered by Benoit, the elderly body-servant, rather
grandiloquently called the seneschal, into the ground-floor room known
traditionally as the library. It still contained several shelves of
neglected volumes, from which it derived its title, but implements
of the chase--fowling-pieces, powder-horns, hunting-bags,
sheath-knives--obtruded far more prominently than those of study. The
furniture was massive, of oak richly carved, and belonging to another
age. Great massive oak beams crossed the rather lofty whitewashed
ceiling.

Here the squat Seigneur de Gavrillac was restlessly pacing when
Andre-Louis was introduced. He was already informed, as he announced at
once, of what had taken place at the Breton arme. M. de Chabrillane
had just left him, and he confessed himself deeply grieved and deeply
perplexed.

“The pity of it!” he said. “The pity of it!” He bowed his enormous head.
“So estimable a young man, and so full of promise. Ah, this La Tour
d’Azyr is a hard man, and he feels very strongly in these matters.
He may be right. I don’t know. I have never killed a man for holding
different views from mine. In fact, I have never killed a man at all.
It isn’t in my nature. I shouldn’t sleep of nights if I did. But men are
differently made.”

“The question, monsieur my godfather,” said Andre-Louis, “is what is to
be done.” He was quite calm and self-possessed, but very white.

M. de Kercadiou stared at him blankly out of his pale eyes.

“Why, what the devil is there to do? From what I am told, Vilmorin went
so far as to strike M. le Marquis.”

“Under the very grossest provocation.”

“Which he himself provoked by his revolutionary language. The poor
lad’s head was full of this encyclopaedist trash. It comes of too much
reading. I have never set much store by books, Andre; and I have never
known anything but trouble to come out of learning. It unsettles a man.
It complicates his views of life, destroys the simplicity which makes
for peace of mind and happiness. Let this miserable affair be a warning
to you, Andre. You are, yourself, too prone to these new-fashioned
speculations upon a different constitution of the social order. You
see what comes of it. A fine, estimable young man, the only prop of
his widowed mother too, forgets himself, his position, his duty to that
mother--everything; and goes and gets himself killed like this. It is
infernally sad. On my soul it is sad.” He produced a handkerchief, and
blew his nose with vehemence.

Andre-Louis felt a tightening of his heart, a lessening of the hopes,
never too sanguine, which he had founded upon his godfather.

“Your criticisms,” he said, “are all for the conduct of the dead, and
none for that of the murderer. It does not seem possible that you should
be in sympathy with such a crime.”

“Crime?” shrilled M. de Kercadiou. “My God, boy, you are speaking of M.
de La Tour d’Azyr.”

“I am, and of the abominable murder he has committed...”

“Stop!” M. de Kercadiou was very emphatic. “I cannot permit that you
apply such terms to him. I cannot permit it. M. le Marquis is my friend,
and is likely very soon to stand in a still closer relationship.”

“Notwithstanding this?” asked Andre-Louis.

M. de Kercadiou was frankly impatient.

“Why, what has this to do with it? I may deplore it. But I have no
right to condemn it. It is a common way of adjusting differences between
gentlemen.”

“You really believe that?”

“What the devil do you imply, Andre? Should I say a thing that I don’t
believe? You begin to make me angry.”

“‘Thou shalt not kill,’ is the King’s law as well as God’s.”

“You are determined to quarrel with me, I think. It was a duel...”

Andre-Louis interrupted him. “It is no more a duel than if it had been
fought with pistols of which only M. le Marquis’s was loaded. He invited
Philippe to discuss the matter further, with the deliberate intent of
forcing a quarrel upon him and killing him. Be patient with me, monsieur
my god-father. I am not telling you of what I imagine but what M. le
Marquis himself admitted to me.”

Dominated a little by the young man’s earnestness, M. de Kercadiou’s
pale eyes fell away. He turned with a shrug, and sauntered over to the
window.

“It would need a court of honour to decide such an issue. And we have no
courts of honour,” he said.

“But we have courts of justice.”

With returning testiness the seigneur swung round to face him again.
“And what court of justice, do you think, would listen to such a plea as
you appear to have in mind?”

“There is the court of the King’s Lieutenant at Rennes.”

“And do you think the King’s Lieutenant would listen to you?”

“Not to me, perhaps, Monsieur. But if you were to bring the plaint...”

“I bring the plaint?” M. de Kercadiou’s pale eyes were wide with horror
of the suggestion.

“The thing happened here on your domain.”

“I bring a plaint against M. de La Tour d’Azyr! You are out of your
senses, I think. Oh, you are mad; as mad as that poor friend of yours
who has come to this end through meddling in what did not concern him.
The language he used here to M. le Marquis on the score of Mabey was
of the most offensive. Perhaps you didn’t know that. It does not at all
surprise me that the Marquis should have desired satisfaction.”

“I see,” said Andre-Louis, on a note of hopelessness.

“You see? What the devil do you see?”

“That I shall have to depend upon myself alone.”

“And what the devil do you propose to do, if you please?”

“I shall go to Rennes, and lay the facts before the King’s Lieutenant.”

“He’ll be too busy to see you.” And M. de Kercadiou’s mind swung a
trifle inconsequently, as weak minds will. “There is trouble enough in
Rennes already on the score of these crazy States General, with which
the wonderful M. Necker is to repair the finances of the kingdom. As
if a peddling Swiss bank-clerk, who is also a damned Protestant, could
succeed where such men as Calonne and Brienne have failed.”

“Good-afternoon, monsieur my godfather,” said Andre-Louis.

“Where are you going?” was the querulous demand.

“Home at present. To Rennes in the morning.”

“Wait, boy, wait!” The squat little man rolled forward, affectionate
concern on his great ugly face, and he set one of his podgy hands on
his godson’s shoulder. “Now listen to me, Andre,” he reasoned. “This is
sheer knight-errantry--moonshine, lunacy. You’ll come to no good by it if
you persist. You’ve read ‘Don Quixote,’ and what happened to him when
he went tilting against windmills. It’s what will happen to you, neither
more nor less. Leave things as they are, my boy. I wouldn’t have a
mischief happen to you.”

Andre-Louis looked at him, smiling wanly.

“I swore an oath to-day which it would damn my soul to break.”

“You mean that you’ll go in spite of anything that I may say?” Impetuous
as he was inconsequent, M. de Kercadiou was bristling again. “Very well,
then, go... Go to the devil!”

“I will begin with the King’s Lieutenant.”

“And if you get into the trouble you are seeking, don’t come whimpering
to me for assistance,” the seigneur stormed. He was very angry now.
“Since you choose to disobey me, you can break your empty head against
the windmill, and be damned to you.”

Andre-Louis bowed with a touch of irony, and reached the door.

“If the windmill should prove too formidable,” said he, from the
threshold, “I may see what can be done with the wind. Good-bye, monsieur
my godfather.”

He was gone, and M. de Kercadiou was alone, purple in the face, puzzling
out that last cryptic utterance, and not at all happy in his mind,
either on the score of his godson or of M. de La Tour d’Azyr. He was
disposed to be angry with them both. He found these headstrong, wilful
men who relentlessly followed their own impulses very disturbing and
irritating. Himself he loved his ease, and to be at peace with his
neighbours; and that seemed to him so obviously the supreme good of life
that he was disposed to brand them as fools who troubled to seek other
things.