Before passing on, we have merely to note the very large part taken
in both the old Babylonian and the Assyrian version by the struggle
against Huwawa. The entire Yale tablet--forming, as we have seen,
the third of the series--is taken up with the preparation for the
struggle, and with the repeated warnings given to Gilgamesh against
the dangerous undertaking. The fourth tablet must have recounted the
struggle itself, and it is not improbable that this episode extended
into the fifth tablet, since in the Assyrian version this is the
case. The elaboration of the story is in itself an argument in favor
of assuming some historical background for it--the recollection of
the conquest of Amurru by some powerful warrior; and we have seen
that this conquest must be ascribed to Enkidu and not to Gilgamesh.



VIII.


If, now, Enkidu is not only the older figure but the one who is the
real hero of the most notable episode in the Gilgamesh Epic; if,
furthermore, Enkidu is the Hercules who kills lions and dispatches
the bull sent by an enraged goddess, what becomes of Gilgamesh? What
is left for him?

In the first place, he is definitely the conqueror of Erech. He builds
the wall of Erech, [114] and we may assume that the designation of
the city as _Uruk supûri_, "the walled Erech," [115] rests upon this
tradition. He is also associated with the great temple Eanna, "the
heavenly house," in Erech. To Gilgamesh belongs also the unenviable
tradition of having exercised his rule in Erech so harshly that the
people are impelled to implore Aruru to create a rival who may rid
the district of the cruel tyrant, who is described as snatching sons
and daughters from their families, and in other ways terrifying the
population--an early example of "Schrecklichkeit." Tablets II to
V inclusive of the Assyrian version being taken up with the Huwawa
episode, modified with a view of bringing the two heroes together,
we come at once to the sixth tablet, which tells the story of how
the goddess Ishtar wooed Gilgamesh, and of the latter's rejection
of her advances. This tale is distinctly a nature myth. The attempt
of Gressmann [116] to find some historical background to the episode
is a failure. The goddess Ishtar symbolizes the earth which woos the
sun in the spring, but whose love is fatal, for after a few months
the sun's power begins to wane. Gilgamesh, who in incantation hymns
is invoked in terms which show that he was conceived as a sun-god,
[117] recalls to the goddess how she changed her lovers into animals,
like Circe of Greek mythology, and brought them to grief. Enraged at
Gilgamesh's insult to her vanity, she flies to her father Anu and cries
for revenge. At this point the episode of the creation of the bull is
introduced, but if the analysis above given is correct it is Enkidu
who is the hero in dispatching the bull, and we must assume that the
sickness with which Gilgamesh is smitten is the punishment sent by Anu
to avenge the insult to his daughter. This sickness symbolizes the
waning strength of the sun after midsummer is past. The sun recedes
from the earth, and this was pictured in the myth as the sun-god's
rejection of Ishtar; Gilgamesh's fear of death marks the approach
of the winter season, when the sun appears to have lost its vigor
completely and is near to death. The entire episode is, therefore,
a nature myth, symbolical of the passing of spring to midsummer and
then to the bare season. The myth has been attached to Gilgamesh as
a favorite figure, and then woven into a pattern with the episode
of Enkidu and the bull. The bull episode can be detached from the
nature myth without any loss to the symbolism of the tale of Ishtar
and Gilgamesh.

As already suggested, with Enkidu's death after this conquest
of the bull the original Enkidu Epic came to an end. In order to
connect Gilgamesh with Enkidu, the former is represented as sharing
in the struggle against the bull. Enkidu is punished with death,
while Gilgamesh is smitten with disease. Since both shared equally
in the guilt, the punishment should have been the same for both. The
differentiation may be taken as an indication that Gilgamesh's disease
has nothing to do with the bull episode, but is merely part of the
nature myth.

Gilgamesh now begins a series of wanderings in search of
the restoration of his vigor, and this _motif_ is evidently a
continuation of the nature myth to symbolize the sun's wanderings
during the dark winter in the hope of renewed vigor with the coming
of the spring. Professor Haupt's view is that the disease from which
Gilgamesh is supposed to be suffering is of a venereal character,
affecting the organs of reproduction. This would confirm the position
here taken that the myth symbolizes the loss of the sun's vigor. The
sun's rays are no longer strong enough to fertilize the earth. In
accord with this, Gilgamesh's search for healing leads him to the
dark regions [118] in which the scorpion-men dwell. The terrors of
the region symbolize the gloom of the winter season. At last Gilgamesh
reaches a region of light again, described as a landscape situated at
the sea. The maiden in control of this region bolts the gate against
Gilgamesh's approach, but the latter forces his entrance. It is the
picture of the sun-god bursting through the darkness, to emerge as
the youthful reinvigorated sun-god of the spring.

Now with the tendency to attach to popular tales and nature myths
lessons illustrative of current beliefs and aspirations, Gilgamesh's
search for renewal of life is viewed as man's longing for eternal
life. The sun-god's waning power after midsummer is past suggests
man's growing weakness after the meridian of life has been left
behind. Winter is death, and man longs to escape it. Gilgamesh's
wanderings are used as illustration of this longing, and accordingly
the search for life becomes also the quest for immortality. Can the
precious boon of eternal life be achieved? Popular fancy created
the figure of a favorite of the gods who had escaped a destructive
deluge in which all mankind had perished. [119] Gilgamesh hears of
this favorite and determines to seek him out and learn from him the
secret of eternal life. The deluge story, again a pure nature myth,
symbolical of the rainy season which destroys all life in nature,
is thus attached to the Epic. Gilgamesh after many adventures finds
himself in the presence of the survivor of the Deluge who, although
human, enjoys immortal life among the gods. He asks the survivor
how he came to escape the common fate of mankind, and in reply
Utnapishtim tells the story of the catastrophe that brought about
universal destruction. The moral of the tale is obvious. Only those
singled out by the special favor of the gods can hope to be removed
to the distant "source of the streams" and live forever. The rest of
mankind must face death as the end of life.

That the story of the Deluge is told in the eleventh tablet of the
series, corresponding to the eleventh month, known as the month of
"rain curse" [120] and marking the height of the rainy season, may
be intentional, just as it may not be accidental that Gilgamesh's
rejection of Ishtar is recounted in the sixth tablet, corresponding to
the sixth month, [121] which marks the end of the summer season. The
two tales may have formed part of a cycle of myths, distributed
among the months of the year. The Gilgamesh Epic, however, does
not form such a cycle. Both myths have been artificially attached
to the adventures of the hero. For the deluge story we now have the
definite proof for its independent existence, through Dr. Poebel's
publication of a Sumerian text which embodies the tale, [122] and
without any reference to Gilgamesh. Similarly, Scheil and Hilprecht
have published fragments of deluge stories written in Akkadian and
likewise without any connection with the Gilgamesh Epic. [123]

In the Epic the story leads to another episode attached to Gilgamesh,
namely, the search for a magic plant growing in deep water, which has
the power of restoring old age to youth. Utnapishtim, the survivor of
the deluge, is moved through pity for Gilgamesh, worn out by his long
wanderings. At the request of his wife, Utnapishtim decides to tell
Gilgamesh of this plant, and he succeeds in finding it. He plucks it
and decides to take it back to Erech so that all may enjoy the benefit,
but on his way stops to bathe in a cool cistern. A serpent comes along
and snatches the plant from him, and he is forced to return to Erech
with his purpose unachieved. Man cannot hope, when old age comes on,
to escape death as the end of everything.

Lastly, the twelfth tablet of the Assyrian version of the Gilgamesh
Epic is of a purely didactic character, bearing evidence of having
been added as a further illustration of the current belief that there
is no escape from the nether world to which all must go after life has
come to an end. Proper burial and suitable care of the dead represent
all that can be done in order to secure a fairly comfortable rest for
those who have passed out of this world. Enkidu is once more introduced
into this episode. His shade is invoked by Gilgamesh and rises up out
of the lower world to give a discouraging reply to Gilgamesh's request,


	"Tell me, my friend, tell me, my friend,
	The law of the earth which thou hast
	experienced, tell me,"


The mournful message comes back:


	"I cannot tell thee, my friend, I cannot tell."


Death is a mystery and must always remain such. The historical
Gilgamesh has clearly no connection with the figure introduced into
this twelfth tablet. Indeed, as already suggested, the Gilgamesh Epic
must have ended with the return to Erech, as related at the close of
the eleventh tablet. The twelfth tablet was added by some school-men of
Babylonia (or perhaps of Assyria), purely for the purpose of conveying
a summary of the teachings in regard to the fate of the dead. Whether
these six episodes covering the sixth to the twelfth tablets, (1) the
nature myth, (2) the killing of the divine bull, (3) the punishment
of Gilgamesh and the death of Enkidu, (4) Gilgamesh's wanderings,
(5) the Deluge, (6) the search for immortality, were all included
at the time that the old Babylonian version was compiled cannot, of
course, be determined until we have that version in a more complete
form. Since the two tablets thus far recovered show that as early as
2000 B.C. the Enkidu tale had already been amalgamated with the current
stories about Gilgamesh, and the endeavor made to transfer the traits
of the former to the latter, it is eminently likely that the story of
Ishtar's unhappy love adventure with Gilgamesh was included, as well
as Gilgamesh's punishment and the death of Enkidu. With the evidence
furnished by Meissner's fragment of a version of the old Babylonian
revision and by our two tablets, of the early disposition to make
popular tales the medium of illustrating current beliefs and the
teachings of the temple schools, it may furthermore be concluded that
the death of Enkidu and the punishment of Gilgamesh were utilized for
didactic purposes in the old Babylonian version. On the other hand,
the proof for the existence of the deluge story in the Hammurabi
period and some centuries later, _independent_ of any connection
with the Gilgamesh Epic, raises the question whether in the old
Babylonian version, of which our two tablets form a part, the deluge
tale was already woven into the pattern of the Epic. At all events,
till proof to the contrary is forthcoming, we may assume that the
twelfth tablet of the Assyrian version, though also reverting to a
Babylonian original, dates as the _latest_ addition to the Epic from
a period subsequent to 2000 B.C.; and that the same is probably the
case with the eleventh tablet.



IX.


To sum up, there are four main currents that flow together in the
Gilgamesh Epic even in its old Babylonian form: (1) the adventures of
a mighty warrior Enkidu, resting perhaps on a faint tradition of the
conquest of Amurru by the hero; (2) the more definite recollection
of the exploits of a foreign invader of Babylonia by the name of
Gilgamesh, whose home appears likewise to have been in the West; [124]
(3) nature myths and didactic tales transferred to Enkidu and Gilgamesh
as popular figures; and (4) the process of weaving the traditions,
exploits, myths and didactic tales together, in the course of which
process Gilgamesh becomes the main hero, and Enkidu his companion.

Furthermore, our investigation has shown that to Enkidu belongs the
episode with the woman, used to illustrate the evolution of primitive
man to the ways and conditions of civilized life, the conquest of
Huwawa in the land of Amurru, the killing of lions and also of the
bull, while Gilgamesh is the hero who conquers Erech. Identified with
the sun-god, the nature myth of the union of the sun with the earth and
the subsequent separation of the two is also transferred to him. The
wanderings of the hero, smitten with disease, are a continuation of
the nature myth, symbolizing the waning vigor of the sun with the
approach of the wintry season.

The details of the process which led to making Gilgamesh the favorite
figure, to whom the traits and exploits of Enkidu and of the sun-god
are transferred, escape us, but of the fact that Enkidu is the _older_
figure, of whom certain adventures were set forth in a tale that
once had an independent existence, there can now be little doubt in
the face of the evidence furnished by the two tablets of the old
Babylonian version; just as the study of these tablets shows that
in the combination of the tales of Enkidu and Gilgamesh, the former
is the prototype of which Gilgamesh is the copy. If the two are
regarded as brothers, as born in the same place, even resembling one
another in appearance and carrying out their adventures in common,
it is because in the process of combination Gilgamesh becomes the
_reflex_ of Enkidu. That Enkidu is not the figure created by Aruru to
relieve Erech of its tyrannical ruler is also shown by the fact that
Gilgamesh remains in control of Erech. It is to Erech that he returns
when he fails of his purpose to learn the secret of escape from old
age and death. Erech is, therefore, not relieved of the presence of
the ruthless ruler through Enkidu. The "Man of Anu" formed by Aruru
as a deliverer is confused in the course of the growth of the Epic
with Enkidu, the offspring of Ninib, and in this way we obtain the
strange contradiction of Enkidu and Gilgamesh appearing first as bitter
rivals and then as close and inseparable friends. It is of the nature
of Epic compositions everywhere to eliminate unnecessary figures by
concentrating on one favorite the traits belonging to another or to
several others.

The close association of Enkidu and Gilgamesh which becomes one of
the striking features in the combination of the tales of these two
heroes naturally recalls the "Heavenly Twins" _motif_, which has been
so fully and so suggestively treated by Professor J. Rendell Harris
in his _Cult of the Heavenly Twins_, (London, 1906). Professor Harris
has conclusively shown how widespread the tendency is to associate
two divine or semi-divine beings in myths and legends as inseparable
companions [125] or twins, like Castor and Pollux, Romulus and Remus,
[126] the Acvins in the Rig-Veda, [127] Cain and Abel, Jacob and
Esau in the Old Testament, the Kabiri of the Phoenicians, [128]
Herakles and Iphikles in Greek mythology, Ambrica and Fidelio in
Teutonic mythology, Patollo and Potrimpo in old Prussian mythology,
Cautes and Cautopates in Mithraism, Jesus and Thomas (according to
the Syriac Acts of Thomas), and the various illustrations of "Dioscuri
in Christian Legends," set forth by Dr. Harris in his work under this
title, which carries the _motif_ far down into the period of legends
about Christian Saints who appear in pairs, including the reference
to such a pair in Shakespeare's Henry V:


	"And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by
	From that day to the ending of the world."--(_Act, IV,
	3, 57-58._)


There are indeed certain parallels which suggest that Enkidu-Gilgamesh
may represent a Babylonian counterpart to the "Heavenly Twins." In
the Indo-Iranian, Greek and Roman mythology, the twins almost
invariably act together. In unison they proceed on expeditions to
punish enemies. [129]

But after all, the parallels are of too general a character to be of
much moment; and moreover the parallels stop short at the critical
point, for Gilgamesh though worsted is _not_ killed by Enkidu,
whereas one of the "Heavenly Twins" is always killed by the brother,
as Abel is by Cain, and Iphikles by his twin brother Herakles. Even
the trait which is frequent in the earliest forms of the "Heavenly
Twins," according to which one is immortal and the other is mortal,
though applying in a measure to Enkidu who is killed by Ishtar, while
Gilgamesh the offspring of a divine pair is only smitten with disease,
is too unsubstantial to warrant more than a general comparison between
the Enkidu-Gilgamesh pair and the various forms of the "twin" _motif_
found throughout the ancient world. For all that, the point is of some
interest that in the Gilgamesh Epic we should encounter two figures who
are portrayed as possessing the same traits and accomplishing feats in
common, which suggest a partial parallel to the various forms in which
the twin-_motif_ appears in the mythologies, folk-lore and legends
of many nations; and it may be that in some of these instances the
duplication is due, as in the case of Enkidu and Gilgamesh, to an
actual transfer of the traits of one figure to another who usurped
his place.



X.


In concluding this study of the two recently discovered tablets of
the old Babylonian version of the Gilgamesh Epic which has brought us
several steps further in the interpretation and in our understanding
of the method of composition of the most notable literary production
of ancient Babylonia, it will be proper to consider the _literary_
relationship of the old Babylonian to the Assyrian version.

We have already referred to the different form in which the names
of the chief figures appear in the old Babylonian version, dGish as
against dGish-gì(n)-mash, dEn-ki-du as against dEn-ki-dú, Hu-wa-wa
as against Hu(m)-ba-ba. Erech appears as _Uruk ribîtim_, "Erech of
the Plazas," as against _Uruk supûri_, "walled Erech" (or "Erech
within the walls"), in the Assyrian version. [130] These variations
point to an _independent_ recension for the Assyrian revision; and
this conclusion is confirmed by a comparison of parallel passages in
our two tablets with the Assyrian version, for such parallels rarely
extend to verbal agreements in details, and, moreover, show that the
Assyrian version has been elaborated.

Beginning with the Pennsylvania tablet, column I is covered in the
Assyrian version by tablet I, 5, 25, to 6, 33, though, as pointed out
above, in the Assyrian version we have the anticipation of the dreams
of Gilgamesh and their interpretation through their recital to Enkidu
by his female companion, whereas in the old Babylonian version we
have the dreams _directly_ given in a conversation between Gilgamesh
and his mother. In the anticipation, there would naturally be some
omissions. So lines 4-5 and 12-13 of the Pennsylvania tablet do not
appear in the Assyrian version, but in their place is a line (I, 5,
35), to be restored to


	"[I saw him and like] a woman I fell in love with him."


which occurs in the old Babylonian version only in connection with
the second dream. The point is of importance as showing that in the
Babylonian version the first dream lays stress upon the omen of
the falling meteor, as symbolizing the coming of Enkidu, whereas
the second dream more specifically reveals Enkidu as a man, [131]
of whom Gilgamesh is instantly enamored. Strikingly variant lines,
though conveying the same idea, are frequent. Thus line 14 of the
Babylonian version reads


	"I bore it and carried it to thee"


and appears in the Assyrian version (I, 5, 35_b_ supplied from 6, 26)


	"I threw it (or him) at thy feet" [132]


with an additional line in elaboration


	"Thou didst bring him into contact with me" [133]


which anticipates the speech of the mother


	(Line 41 = Assyrian version I, 6, 33).


Line 10 of the Pennsylvania tablet has _pa-hi-ir_ as against _iz-za-az_
I, 5, 31.

Line 8 has _ik-ta-bi-it_ as against _da-an_ in the Assyrian version I,
5, 29.

More significant is the variant to line 9


	"I became weak and its weight I could not bear"


as against I, 5, 30.


	"Its strength was overpowering, [134] and I could not endure
	its weight."


The important lines 31-36 are not found in the Assyrian version,
with the exception of I, 6, 27, which corresponds to lines 33-34,
but this lack of correspondence is probably due to the fact that the
Assyrian version represents the anticipation of the dreams which,
as already suggested, might well omit some details. As against this
we have in the Assyrian version I, 6, 23-25, an elaboration of line
30 in the Pennsylvania tablet and taken over from the recital of
the first dream. Through the Assyrian version I, 6, 31-32, we can
restore the closing lines of column I of the Pennsylvania tablet,
while with line 33 = line 45 of the Pennsylvania tablet, the parallel
between the two versions comes to an end. Lines 34-43 of the Assyrian
version (bringing tablet I to a close) [135] represent an elaboration
of the speech of Ninsun, followed by a further address of Gilgamesh
to his mother, and by the determination of Gilgamesh to seek out
Enkidu. [136] Nothing of this sort appears to have been included in
the old Babylonian version.Our text proceeds with the scene between
Enkidu and the woman, in which the latter by her charms and her appeal
endeavors to lead Enkidu away from his life with the animals. From
the abrupt manner in which the scene is introduced in line 43 of the
Pennsylvania tablet, it is evident that this cannot be the _first_
mention of the woman. The meeting must have been recounted in the
first tablet, as is the case in the Assyrian version. [137] The second
tablet takes up the direct recital of the dreams of Gilgamesh and
then continues the narrative. Whether in the old Babylonian version
the scene between Enkidu and the woman was described with the same
naïve details, as in the Assyrian version, of the sexual intercourse
between the two for six days and seven nights cannot of course be
determined, though presumably the Assyrian version, with the tendency
of epics to become more elaborate as they pass from age to age, added
some realistic touches. Assuming that lines 44-63 of the Pennsylvania
tablet--the cohabitation of Enkidu and the address of the woman--is
a repetition of what was already described in the first tablet, the
comparison with the Assyrian version I, 4, 16-41, not only points to
the elaboration of the later version, but likewise to an independent
recension, even where parallel lines can be picked out. Only lines
46-48 of the Pennsylvania tablet form a complete parallel to line 21
of column 4 of the Assyrian version. The description in lines 22-32
of column 4 is missing, though it may, of course, have been included
in part in the recital in the first tablet of the old Babylonian
version. Lines 49-59 of the Pennsylvania tablet are covered by 33-39,
the only slight difference being the specific mention in line 58 of
the Pennsylvania tablet of Eanna, the temple in Erech, described as
"the dwelling of Anu," whereas in the Assyrian version Eanna is merely
referred to as the "holy house" and described as "the dwelling of
Anu and Ishtar," where Ishtar is clearly a later addition.

Leaving aside lines 60-61, which may be merely a variant (though
independent) of line 39 of column 4 of the Assyrian version, we now
have in the Pennsylvania tablet a second speech of the woman to Enkidu
(not represented in the Assyrian version) beginning like the first
one with _alka_, "Come" (lines 62-63), in which she asks Enkidu to
leave the "accursed ground" in which he dwells. This speech, as the
description which follows, extending into columns 3-4, and telling how
the woman clothed Enkidu, how she brought him to the sheep folds, how
she taught him to eat bread and to drink wine, and how she instructed
him in the ways of civilization, must have been included in the second
tablet of the Assyrian version which has come down to us in a very
imperfect form. Nor is the scene in which Enkidu and Gilgamesh have
their encounter found in the preserved portions of the second (or
possibly the third) tablet of the Assyrian version, but only a brief
reference to it in the fourth tablet, [138] in which in Epic style the
story is repeated, leading up to the second exploit--the joint campaign
of Enkidu and Gilgamesh against Huwawa. This reference, covering only
seven lines, corresponds to lines 192-231 of the Pennsylvania tablet;
but the former being the repetition and the latter the original
recital, the comparison to be instituted merely reveals again the
independence of the Assyrian version, as shown in the use of _kibsu_,
"tread" (IV, 2, 46), for _sêpu_, "foot" (l. 216), _i-na-us_, "quake"
(line 5C), as against _ir-tu-tu_ (ll. 221 and 226).

Such variants as


	_d_Gish êribam ûl iddin (l. 217)


against


	_d_Gilgamesh ana surûbi ûl namdin, (IV, 2, 47).


and again


	_issabtûma kima lîm_ "they grappled at the gate of the family
	house" (IV, 2, 48),


against


	_issabtûma ina bâb bît emuti_, "they grappled at the gate of
	the family house" (IV, 2, 48),


all point once more to the literary independence of the Assyrian
version. The end of the conflict and the reconciliation of the two
heroes is likewise missing in the Assyrian version. It may have been
referred to at the beginning of column 3 [139] of Tablet IV.

Coming to the Yale tablet, the few passages in which a comparison may
be instituted with the fourth tablet of the Assyrian version, to which
in a general way it must correspond, are not sufficient to warrant any
conclusions, beyond the confirmation of the literary independence of
the Assyrian version. The section comprised within lines 72-89, where
Enkidu's grief at his friend's decision to fight Huwawa is described
[140], and he makes confession of his own physical exhaustion, _may_
correspond to Tablet IV, column 4, of the Assyrian version. This
would fit in with the beginning of the reverse, the first two lines
of which (136-137) correspond to column 5 of the fourth tablet of the
Assyrian version, with a variation "seven-fold fear" [141] as against
"fear of men" in the Assyrian version. If lines 138-139 (in column
4) of the Yale tablet correspond to line 7 of column 5 of Tablet IV
of the Assyrian version, we would again have an illustration of the
elaboration of the later version by the addition of lines 3-6. But
beyond this we have merely the comparison of the description of Huwawa


	"Whose roar is a flood, whose mouth is fire, and whose breath
	is death"


which occurs twice in the Yale tablet (lines 110-111 and 196-197),
with the same phrase in the Assyrian version Tablet IV, 5, 3--but here,
as just pointed out, with an elaboration.

Practically, therefore, the entire Yale tablet represents an addition
to our knowledge of the Huwawa episode, and until we are fortunate
enough to discover more fragments of the fourth tablet of the Assyrian
version, we must content ourselves with the conclusions reached from
a comparison of the Pennsylvania tablet with the parallels in the
Assyrian version.

It may be noted as a general point of resemblance in the exterior form
of the old Babylonian and Assyrian versions that both were inscribed
on tablets containing six columns, three on the obverse and three on
the reverse; and that the length of the tablets--an average of 40 to
50 lines--was about the same, thus revealing in the external form
a conventiona1 size for the tablets in the older period, which was
carried over into later times.




PENNSYLVANIA TABLET


The 240 lines of the six columns of the text are enumerated in
succession, with an indication on the margin where a new column
begins. This method, followed also in the case of the Yale tablet,
seems preferable to Langdon's breaking up of the text into Obverse and
Reverse, with a separate enumeration for each of the six columns. In
order, however, to facilitate a comparison with Langdon's edition,
a table is added:


	Obverse Col.   I,  1	=   Line  1 of our text.
	,,			   I,  5	=	 ,,   5  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,			   I, 10	=	 ,,  10  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,		       I, 15	=	 ,,  15  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,             I, 20	=	 ,,  20  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,			   I, 25	=	 ,,  25  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,			   I, 30	=	 ,,  30  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,			   I, 35	=	 ,,  35  ,,  ,,    ,,
	Col.          II,  1	=   Line 41	 ,,  ,,	   ,,
	,,            II,  5	=	 ,,  45  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,            II, 10	=	 ,,  50  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,            II, 15	=	 ,,  55  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,            II, 20	=	 ,,  60  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,            II, 25	=	 ,,  65  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,            II, 30	=	 ,,  70  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,            II, 35	=	 ,,  75  ,,  ,,    ,,
	Col.         III,  1	=   Line 81	 ,,  ,,	   ,,
	,,           III,  5	=	 ,,  85  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,           III, 10	=	 ,,  90  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,           III, 15	=	 ,,  95  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,           III, 26	=	 ,, 100  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,           III, 25	=	 ,, 105  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,           III, 30	=	 ,, 110  ,,  ,,    ,,
	,,           III, 35	=	 ,, 115  ,,  ,,    ,,

	Reverse Col.    I,  1 (= Col. IV) =  Line 131 of our text.
	,,              I,  5			  =   ,,  135  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,              I, 10			  =   ,,  140  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,              I, 15			  =   ,,  145  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,              I, 20			  =   ,,  150  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,              I, 25			  =   ,,  155  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,              I, 30			  =   ,,  160  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,             II,  1 (= Col.  V) =  Line 171  ,,  ,,   ,,
	,,             II,  5			  =   ,,  175  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,             II, 10			  =   ,,  180  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,             II, 15			  =   ,,  185  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,             II, 20			  =   ,,  190  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,             II, 25			  =   ,,  195  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,             II, 30			  =   ,,  200  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,            III,  1 (= Col. VI) =  Line 208  ,,  ,,   ,,
	,,            III,  5			  =   ,,  212  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,            III, 10			  =   ,,  217  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,            III, 15			  =   ,,  222  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,            III, 20			  =   ,,  227  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,            III, 25			  =   ,,  232  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,            III, 30			  =   ,,  237  ,,  ,,	,,
	,,            III, 33			  =   ,,  240  ,,  ,,	,,





PENNSYLVANIA TABLET.



TRANSLITERATION.


Col. I.

	it-bi-e-ma dGis sú-na-tam i-pa-ás-sar
	iz-za-kàr-am a-na um-mi-sú
	um-mi i-na sá-at mu-si-ti-ia
	sá-am-ha-ku-ma at-ta-na-al-la-ak
	i-na bi-ri-it it-lu-tim
	ib-ba-sú-nim-ma ka-ka-bu sá-ma-i
	[ki]-is-rù sá A-nim im-ku-ut a-na si-ri-ia
	ás-si-sú-ma ik-ta-bi-it e-li-ia
	ú-ni-is-sú-ma nu-us-sá-sú ú-ul il-ti-'i
	Urukki ma-tum pa-hi-ir e-li-sú
	it-lu-tum ú-na-sá-ku si-pi-sú
	ú-um-mi-id-ma pu-ti
	i-mi-du ia-ti
	ás-si-a-sú-ma ab-ba-la-ás-sú a-na si-ri-ki
	um-mi dGis mu-di-a-at ka-la-ma
	iz-za-kàr-am a-na dGis
	mi-in-di dGis sá ki-ma ka-ti
	i-na si-ri i-wa-li-id-ma
	ú-ra-ab-bi-sú sá-du-ú
	ta-mar-sú-ma [kima Sal(?)] ta-ha-du at-ta
	it-lu-tum ú-na-sá-ku si-pi-sú
	tí-it-ti-ra-ás-[sú tu-ut]-tu-ú-ma
	ta-tar-ra-[as-su] a-na si-[ri]-ia
	[us]-ti-nim-ma i-ta-mar sá-ni-tam
	[sú-na]-ta i-ta-wa-a-am a-na um-mi-sú
	[um-mi] a-ta-mar sá-ni-tam
	[sú-na-tu a-ta]-mar e-mi-a i-na su-ki-im
	[sá Uruk]ki ri-bi-tim
	ha-as-si-nu na-di-i-ma
	e-li-sú pa-ah-ru
	ha-as-si-nu-um-ma sá-ni bu-nu-sú
	a-mur-sú-ma ah-ta-du a-na-ku
	a-ra-am-sú-ma ki-ma ás-sá-tim
	a-ha-ab-bu-ub el-sú
	el-ki-sú-ma ás-ta-ka-an-sú
	a-na a-hi-ia
	um-mi dGis mu-da-at [ka]-la-ma
	[iz-za-kàr-am a-na dGis]
	[dGis sá ta-mu-ru amêlu]
	[ta-ha-ab-bu-ub ki-ma ás-sá-tim el-sú]


Col. II.

	ás-sum us-[ta]-ma-ha-ru it-ti-ka
	dGis sú-na-tam i-pa-sar
	dEn-ki-[du wa]-si-ib ma-har ha-ri-im-tim
	ur-[sá ir]-ha-mu di-da-sá(?) ip-tí-[e]
	[dEn-ki]-du im-ta-si a-sar i-wa-al-du
	ûm, 6 ù 7 mu-si-a-tim
	dEn-[ki-du] ti-bi-i-ma
	sá-[am-ka-ta] ir-hi
	ha-[ri-im-tum pa-a]-sá i-pu-sá-am-ma
	iz-za-[kàr-am] a-na dEn-ki-du
	a-na-tal-ka dEn-ki-du ki-ma ili ta-ba-ás-si
	am-mi-nim it-ti na-ma-ás-te-e
	ta-at-ta-[na-al]-ak si-ra-am
	al-kam lu-úr-di-ka
	a-na libbi [Urukki] ri-bi-tim
	a-na bît [el]-lim mu-sá-bi sá A-nim
	dEn-ki-du ti-bi lu-ru-ka
	a-na Ê-[an]-na mu-sá-bi sá A-nim
	a-sar [dGis gi]-it-ma-[lu] ne-pi-si-tim
	ù at-[ta] ki-[ma Sal ta-ha]-bu-[ub]-sú
	ta-[ra-am-sú ki-ma] ra-ma-an-ka
	al-ka ti-ba i-[na] ga-ag-ga-ri
	ma-a-ag-ri-i-im
	is-me a-wa-as-sa im-ta-har ga-ba-sá
	mi-il-[kum] sá assatim
	im-ta-ku-ut a-na libbi-sú
	is-hu-ut li-ib-sá-am
	is-ti-nam ú-la-ab-bi-is-sú
	li-ib-[sá-am] sá-ni-a-am
	si-i it-ta-al-ba-ás
	sa-ab-tat ga-as-su
	ki-ma [ili] i-ri-id-di-sú
	a-na gu-up-ri sá-ri-i-im
	a-sar tar-ba-si-im
	i-na [ás]-ri-sú [im]-hu-ruri-ia-ú
	[ù sú-u dEn-ki-du i-lit-ta-sú sá-du-um-ma]
	[it-ti sabâti-ma ik-ka-la sam-ma]
	[it-ti bu-lim mas-ka-a i-sat-ti]
	[it-ti na-ma-ás-te-e mê i-tab lib-ba-sú]


(Perhaps one additional line missing.)



Col. III.

	si-iz-ba sá na-ma-ás-te-e
	i-te-en-ni-ik
	a-ka-lam is-ku-nu ma-har-sú
	ib-tí-ik-ma i-na-at-tal
	ù ip-pa-al-la-as
	ú-ul i-di dEn-ki-du
	aklam a-na a-ka-lim
	sikaram a-na sá-te-e-im
	la-a lum-mu-ud
	ha-ri-im-tum pi-sá i-pu-sá-am-ma
	iz-za-kàr-am a-na dEn-ki-du
	a-ku-ul ak-lam dEn-ki-du
	zi-ma-at ba-la-ti-im
	sikaram si-ti si-im-ti ma-ti
	i-ku-ul a-ak-lam dEn-ki-du
	a-di si-bi-e-sú
	sikaram is-ti-a-am
	7 as-sa-am-mi-im
	it-tap-sar kab-ta-tum i-na-an-gu
	i-li-is libba-sú-ma
	pa-nu-sú [it]-tam-ru
	ul-tap-pi-it [lùSÚ]-I
	sú-hu-ra-am pa-ga-ar-sú
	sá-am-nam ip-ta-sá-ás-ma
	a-we-li-is i-we
	il-ba-ás li-ib-sá-am
	ki-ma mu-ti i-ba-ás-si
	il-ki ka-ak-ka-sú
	la-bi ú-gi-ir-ri
	us-sa-ak-pu re'ûti mu-si-a-tim
	ut-tap-pi-is sib-ba-ri
	la-bi uk-ta-si-id
	it-ti-[lu] na-ki-[di-e] ra-bu-tum
	dEn-ki-du ma-as-sa-ar-sú-nu
	a-we-lum gis-ru-um
	is-te-en it-lum
	a-na [na-ki-di-e(?) i]-za-ak-ki-ir


(About five lines missing.)



Col. IV.

(About eight lines missing.)


	i-ip-pu-us ul-sa-am
	is-si-ma i-ni-i-sú
	i-ta-mar a-we-lam
	iz-za-kàr-am a-na harimtim
	sá-am-ka-at uk-ki-si a-we-lam
	a-na mi-nim il-li-kam
	zi-ki-ir-sú lu-us-sú
	ha-ri-im-tum is-ta-si a-we-lam
	i-ba-us-su-um-ma i-ta-mar-sú
	e-di-il e-es ta-hi-[il-la]-am
	lim-nu a-la-ku ma-na-ah-[ti]-ka
	e-pi-sú i-pu-sá-am-ma
	iz-za-kàr-am a-na dEn-[ki-du]
	bi-ti-is e-mu-tim ik ......
	si-ma-a-at ni-si-i-ma
	tu-a-(?)-ar e-lu-tim
	a-na âli(?) dup-sak-ki-i e-si-en
	uk-la-at âli(?) e-mi-sa a-a-ha-tim
	a-na sarri sá Urukki ri-bi-tim
	pi-ti pu-uk episi(-si) a-na ha-a-a-ri
	a-na dGis sarri sá Urukki ri-bi-tim
	pi-ti pu-uk episi(-si)
	a-na ha-a-a-ri
	ás-sa-at si-ma-tim i-ra-ah-hi
	sú-ú pa-na-nu-um-ma
	mu-uk wa-ar-ka-nu
	i-na mi-il-ki sá ili ga-bi-ma
	i-na bi-ti-ik a-bu-un-na-ti-sú
	si-ma-as-su
	a-na zi-ik-ri it-li-im
	i-ri-ku pa-nu-sú


(About three lines missing.)



Col. V.

(About six lines missing.)


	i-il-la-ak [dEn-ki-du i-na pa-ni]
	u-sá-am-ka-at [wa]-ar-ki-sú
	i-ru-ub-ma a-na libbi Urukki ri-bi-tim
	ip-hur um-ma-nu-um i-na si-ri-sú
	iz-zi-za-am-ma i-na su-ki-im
	sá Urukki ri-bi-tim
	pa-ah-ra-a-ma ni-sú
	i-ta-wa-a i-na si-ri-sú
	a-na salam dGis ma-si-il pi-it-tam
	la-nam sá-pi-il
	si-ma .... [sá-ki-i pu]-uk-ku-ul
	............. i-pa-ka-du
	i-[na mâti da-an e-mu]-ki i-wa
	si-iz-ba sá na-ma-as-te-e
	i-te-en-ni-ik
	ka-a-a-na i-na [libbi] Urukki kak-ki-a-tum
	it-lu-tum ú-te-el-li-lu
	sá-ki-in ur-sá-nu
	a-na itli sá i-sá-ru zi-mu-sú
	a-na dGis ki-ma i-li-im
	sá-ki-is-sum me-ih-rù
	a-na dIs-ha-ra ma-a-a-lum
	na-di-i-ma
	dGis it-[ti-il-ma wa-ar-ka-tim]
	i-na mu-si in-ni-[ib-bi]-it
	i-na-ag-sá-am-ma
	it-ta-[zi-iz dEn-ki-du] i-na sûkim
	ip-ta-ra-[as a-la]-ak-tam
	sá dGis
	[a-na e-pi-is] da-na-ni-is-sú


(About three lines missing.)



Col. VI.

(About four lines missing.)


	sar(?)-ha
	dGis ...
	i-na si-ri-[sú il-li-ka-am dEn-ki-du]
	i-ha-an-ni-ib [pi-ir-ta-sú]
	it-bi-ma [il-li-ik]
	a-na pa-ni-sú
	it-tam-ha-ru i-na ri-bi-tum ma-ti
	dEn-ki-du ba-ba-am ip-ta-ri-ik
	i-na si-pi-sú
	dGis e-ri-ba-am ú-ul id-di-in
	is-sa-ab-tu-ma ki-ma li-i-im
	i-lu-du
	zi-ip-pa-am 'i-bu-tu
	i-ga-rum ir-tu-tu
	dGis ù dEn-ki-du
	is-sa-ab-tu-ú-ma
	ki-ma li-i-im i-lu-du
	zi-ip-pa-am 'i-bu-tu
	i-ga-rum ir-tu-tú
	ik-mi-is-ma dGis
	i-na ga-ag-ga-ri si-ip-sú
	ip-si-ih uz-za-sú-ma
	i-ni-ih i-ra-as-su
	is-tu i-ra-su i-ni-hu
	dEn-ki-du a-na sá-si-im
	iz-za-kàr-am a-na dGis
	ki-ma is-te-en-ma um-ma-ka
	ú-li-id-ka
	ri-im-tum sá su-pu-ri
	dNin-sun-na
	ul-lu e-li mu-ti ri-es-ka
	sar-ru-tú sá ni-si
	i-si-im-kum dEn-lil
		duppu 2 kam-ma
	sú-tu-ur e-li .....................
		4 sú-si




TRANSLATION.


Col. I.

	Gish sought to interpret the dream;
	Spoke to his mother:
	"My mother, during my night
	I became strong and moved about
	among the heroes;
	And from the starry heaven
	A meteor(?) of Anu fell upon me:
	I bore it and it grew heavy upon me,
	I became weak and its weight I could not endure.
	The land of Erech gathered about it.
	The heroes kissed its feet. [142]
	It was raised up before me.
	They stood me up. [143]
	I bore it and carried it to thee."
	The mother of Gish, who knows all things,
	Spoke to Gish:
	"Some one, O Gish, who like thee
	In the field was born and
	Whom the mountain has reared,
	Thou wilt see (him) and [like a woman(?)] thou wilt rejoice.
	Heroes will kiss his feet.
	Thou wilt spare [him and wilt endeavor]
	To lead him to me."
	He slept and saw another
	Dream, which he reported to his mother:
	["My mother,] I have seen another
	[Dream.] My likeness I have seen in the streets
	[Of Erech] of the plazas.
	An axe was brandished, and
	They gathered about him;
	And the axe made him angry.
	I saw him and I rejoiced,
	I loved him as a woman,
	I embraced him.
	I took him and regarded him
	As my brother."
	The mother of Gish, who knows all things,
	[Spoke to Gish]:
	["O Gish, the man whom thou sawest,]
	[Whom thou didst embrace like a woman].