[Chapter 3]

As my argument proceeds, I will prove that what appear to be evils are not actually evils. For now, I will say this: what you call hard measure, misfortunes, and things we ought to pray against are really to our advantage. First, they benefit those to whom they happen. Second, they benefit all mankind, for whom the gods care more than for individuals. Next, these evils happen with the full consent of those who suffer them. If people are unwilling to receive misfortunes, they deserve to endure them. Finally, misfortunes happen by destiny. They happen to good men by the same law that makes them good. After this, I will convince you never to pity any good man. Though he may be called unhappy, he cannot truly be so.

The first proposition seems the hardest to prove. You might ask if it is an advantage to be driven into exile, to be brought to poverty, to bury your wife and children, to be publicly disgraced, or to lose your health. Yes, it is! If you are surprised that these things benefit a man, you will also be surprised that a man can be helped by surgery, being burned to stop bleeding, or going without food. Some men, to be cured, have their bones scraped and extracted, their veins pulled out, or their limbs amputated when keeping them would ruin the whole body. You must allow me to prove that some misfortunes are for the good of those who suffer them. This is just as true as the fact that some things people praise and seek, like rich food and drunkenness, actually kill us through pleasure.

Our friend Demetrius used to say a grand thing that still rings in my ears. He said, "No one seems more unhappy to me than the man who has never experienced misfortune." That man has never had an opportunity to test himself. Even if everything happens according to his wishes, the gods have judged him unfavorably. He has never been deemed worthy to conquer ill fortune. Ill fortune avoids cowards, as if saying, "There is no reason to take that man for my opponent, as he will immediately surrender. I will not need all my strength against him. A mere threat will put him to flight. He does not even dare to face me. I will look for someone else to fight hand to hand. I am embarrassed to battle someone who is ready to be beaten."

A gladiator considers it a disgrace to fight an inferior opponent. He knows that winning without danger means winning without glory. Fortune acts the same way. She seeks out the bravest to challenge. She ignores some people with disdain and targets the most unyielding and upright men to test her strength against them. She tested Mucius with fire, Fabricius with poverty, Rutilius with exile, Regulus with torture, Socrates with poison, and Cato with death. Only bad fortune discovers these glorious examples.

Mucius was not unhappy because he grasped the enemy's fire with his right hand and paid the penalty for his mistake. He was not unhappy because he defeated the King with his burned hand, when he could not do so with a sword. He would not have been happier if he had kept his hand warm in his mistress's bosom.

Fabricius was not unhappy because he dug his own land when the state did not need him. He was not unhappy because he fought against riches as fiercely as he fought against Pyrrhus. He ate roots and herbs beside his hearth, grubbing them up from his field even as an old man who had celebrated a triumph. He would not have been happier gorging himself with exotic fish and foreign birds, piling fruit around game that cost hunters their lives to catch.

Rutilius was not unhappy because those who condemned him will have to answer for it throughout history. He endured the loss of his country more calmly than the fact of his banishment. He was the only man who refused anything to Sulla the dictator. When recalled from exile, he nearly went further away to banish himself even more. He said, "Let those who remain in Rome during your fortunate reign see the Forum drenched with blood. Let them see the heads of Senators above the Pool of Servilius, the assassins roaming the city, and thousands of Roman citizens slaughtered after being promised mercy. Let those who cannot go into exile watch these things." Lucius Sulla is not truly happy just because people clear a path for him in the Forum with swords, and because he counts out the price of blood through the state treasury.

Now let us look at Regulus. Fortune did no injury to him when she made him an example of good faith and endurance. They pierced his skin with nails. Wherever he rested his weary body, it rested on a wound. His eyes were forced open forever. But the greater his sufferings, the greater his glory. If you want to know how far he is from regretting his choice, heal his wounds and send him back into the Senate. He will give the same advice.

You should not think Maecenas was a happier man. Troubled by love and crying over his wife's daily rejections, he tried to sleep by listening to distant music. He drugged himself with wine and distracted his thoughts with a thousand pleasures. But Maecenas could no more sleep on his soft cushions than Regulus could on the rack. Regulus was consoled by knowing he suffered for honor, looking past his torments to their cause. Maecenas, sick with too much enjoyment, was hurt more by the cause of his suffering than by the suffering itself. If people could choose their destiny, more would choose to be Regulus than Maecenas.

Socrates was not treated badly just because he drank the poison assigned by the state as if it were a potion for immortality. He argued about death until he died. He was not mistreated just because his blood froze and his veins stopped as the chill of death crept over him. He is much more to be envied than a man served on precious stones, whose drink is cooled with snow in a golden cup by a corrupted servant. Such men throw up everything they drink in misery and disgust, while Socrates cheerfully and willingly drained his poison.

As for Cato, all men must agree that he reached the highest happiness. Nature herself chose him as worthy to fight all her terrors. She decided that since the enmity of powerful men is grievous, Cato should be opposed by Pompey, Caesar, and Crassus. Since it is grievous to be defeated by inferiors when running for office, he should be defeated by Vatinius. Since it is grievous to fight in civil wars, he should fight all over the world for a good cause with equal stubbornness and bad luck. Since it is grievous to end one's own life, he should do exactly that. Nature did this so all men would know that the things Cato endured are not real evils.
