Chapter Sixteen: The Song of the Singer, Sigemund

In the morning, many warriors gathered around the feast-hall. Leaders from far and near traveled across the wide roads to see the wonder of Grendel's claw and the tracks left by the monster. Grendel's death did not bring sorrow to any of the men who examined his trail. They traced how the defeated monster, weary and bleeding, had dragged himself away to the lake of water-demons to die.

The lake water was boiling with blood. The dark waves swelled, mixed with hot gore. The doomed creature had hidden there in his swamp refuge. Deprived of all joy, Grendel laid down his life and his heathen soul in the water, where hell claimed him.

Afterward, the older warriors and young men rode back from their joyful trip, riding their white horses back from the lake. Along the way, they praised Beowulf's glory. Many said that neither in the north nor the south, across the wide earth under the sky, was there any warrior better or more worthy of a kingdom than Beowulf. Yet, they did not speak ill of their own gracious king, Hrothgar, for he was a truly good ruler.

Occasionally, the warriors raced their brown horses on the open paths. A king's thane, a poet who knew many ancient traditions and stories, began to make up new verses. He skillfully started to recite Beowulf's adventure, weaving his words to tell a brilliant tale.

The poet sang of everything he had heard about the mighty deeds of Sigemund, the son of Waels. He sang of Sigemund's struggles, his wide journeys, and the feuds that most men knew nothing about, except for his nephew and companion Fitela. Sigemund would share these secrets with Fitela because they were always close companions in battle. Together, they had slain many giants with their swords.

Sigemund earned great glory after his death because he had killed a dragon that guarded a massive treasure hoard. Under a gray stone, the hero's son risked the bold deed alone, without Fitela beside him. Sigemund managed to stab his sword straight through the wonderful serpent, pinning it to the wall. The dragon was slain. Sigemund's courage allowed him to take the treasure hoard for himself. He loaded a ship, carrying the bright treasures into its hold. Meanwhile, the dragon's body melted from its own internal heat.