Chapter Ten: Beowulf's Swimming Contest with Breca

Beowulf, the son of Ecgtheow, replied: "Well, my friend Unferth, you have talked a lot about Breca and our race, mostly because you are drunk on beer! But I tell you the truth: I was much stronger in the water and endured far more hardships in the waves than any other man.

When we were boys, we made a boast to risk our lives out on the open ocean. And we did exactly that. As we swam, we held drawn swords in our hands to defend ourselves against dangerous sea beasts. Breca could not swim away from me, nor was he faster in the water, and I stayed right beside him. We swam side-by-side for five nights until a terrible storm drove us apart. Churning waves, freezing cold weather, and a dark night crashed against us. A fierce north wind turned against us, and the waves grew dangerously rough.

The sea monsters grew angry. Fortunately, my hand-linked chain-mail armor protected me from their attacks. A deadly beast pulled me to the bottom of the ocean, holding me tight in his grip. But I managed to stab the monster with the point of my sword. I killed the mighty sea beast by my own hand, freeing myself.

Other monsters constantly attacked me in the dark, but I fought back with my sword as best I could. They did not get to enjoy a feast at the bottom of the sea with my body. Instead, by morning, they lay dead along the shore, killed by my blade. They would never again block the paths of sailors across the deep ocean.

Then, the sun rose in the east, God's bright light. The waves calmed down, and I could see the windy cliffs of the coast. Fate often saves a man who is not yet fated to die, if his courage is strong! In that fight, I killed nine sea monsters with my sword. I have never heard of a harder night battle under the sky, or of a man in worse danger in the ocean. Yet, I escaped with my life, although I was completely exhausted. The currents eventually washed me ashore in the land of the Finns.

I have never heard of you fighting in such terrifying sword battles, Unferth! Neither you nor Breca have ever done anything so daring in combat, though I do not mean to boast. But the truth is, you murdered your own brothers, your close relatives! Because of that crime, you will suffer in hell, no matter how clever you think you are.

I tell you the truth, Unferth: Grendel would never have caused so much horror and humiliation to your king if you were as fierce in battle as you claim to be. But Grendel has learned that he does not need to fear the Danes or their weapons. He does whatever he wants, slaughtering and feasting on the Danish people, expecting no fight from them. But very soon, I will show him the strength and courage of the Geats! After that, when the bright morning sun shines again, anyone who wishes will be able to enter this feast-hall in peace!"