Chapter Seventeen: King Heremod and Hrothgar's Praise

Sigemund was the most famous adventurer in the world for his brave deeds, which brought him early success. On the other hand, the power and courage of the ancient Danish King Heremod had faded. Heremod was betrayed to his enemies in the land of the Jutes and quickly sent to his death. Sorrows had crippled him for too long, and he became a deadly burden to his people and his nobles. In the past, many wise men had mourned the king's departure, hoping that he would protect the people, their treasures, and their homeland. But while Beowulf, the nephew of Hygelac, became beloved by his friends and all mankind, sin and greed entered Heremod's heart.

Occasionally racing their horses, the warriors rode back along the dirt roads. The morning light grew brighter. Many brave men went to the great hall to see the wonder of the monster's claw. The king himself, guardian of the kingdom's treasures, stepped from his wife's chambers, followed by a great troop of nobles. Beside him, Queen Wealhtheow walked to the feast-hall with a company of maidens.

Hrothgar walked to the hall, stood on the steps, and looked at the golden roof and Grendel's claw. He spoke: "Let us thank the Almighty immediately for this sight! I endured much suffering from Grendel, but God, the Guardian of Glory, can always work wonder upon wonder. Not long ago, I lost all hope of finding relief from my woes, when this beautiful feast-hall stood stained with blood. It was a deep sorrow for all our wise counselors, who did not think they could ever defend our home against demons and evil spirits.

Now, through the power of the Lord, a young warrior has done what all of us with our clever plans could not accomplish! If the mother who gave birth to such a son still lives, she can surely say that God was gracious to her. Now, Beowulf, best of men, I will love you in my heart as a son. Keep this bond close from now on. You shall lack nothing that I have the power to grant you. Often I have given treasures to lesser warriors who were weaker in battle. But you have done such great things that your glory will live forever. May the Almighty reward you with good, just as he has done so far!"