Chapter Forty-One: The Death of the Dragon

The fierce fire-dragon, the terror of the Geats, renewed the feud for a third time. Rushing at the brave hero when the opportunity arose, the hot, battle-grim monster clamped its sharp teeth around Beowulf's neck. The king was covered in his own life-blood, which welled up in torrents, staining his armor.

Then, the noble Wiglaf, standing by his king in his hour of need, displayed the great courage and skill that were natural to him. He did not strike at the dragon's head, but to help his relative, his hand was badly burned as he plunged his gold-adorned sword into the beast's belly. The blow struck deep, and the dragon's fire immediately began to fade.

The king regained his senses and drew a sharp battle-knife from his mail-shirt. With a swift stroke, the king sliced the serpent in half. They had defeated the enemy, driving the life out of the beast. The two noble relatives had destroyed the dragon together. Such should a warrior be in times of need!

But for Beowulf, this was his final hour of victory. The wound that the dragon had given him began to burn and swell, and he soon felt the deadly poison boiling in his chest. The king walked to a seat by the wall, keeping his wits about him. He gazed upon the giants' ancient architecture, seeing how the stone arches inside the chamber were supported securely by pillars.

The loyal Wiglaf washed the famous prince, bathing his bloody wounds with water and unfastening his helmet to let him breathe.

Beowulf spoke, despite his painful, mortal wound. He knew well that he had lived his portion of earthly joy. His days were done, and death was close at hand.

"Now I would have given my armor to my son, if God had granted me an heir of my own blood to succeed me. I have ruled this people for fifty years. No king of any neighboring nation dared to threaten me with war or terror. I waited for my appointed time on earth, ruled my kingdom justly, sought no dishonest quarrels, and swore no false oaths. Because of this, I can rejoice even as I die of these wounds. The Creator of Men will have no reason to accuse me of killing my own relatives when my soul leaves my body.

Now go quickly, beloved Wiglaf, and examine the hoard under the gray stone, now that the dragon lies dead and deprived of his treasure. Hurry, so that I may look upon the ancient wealth, the gold, and the bright gems. Seeing these treasures will make it easier for me to give up my life and the kingdom I have ruled for so long."
