[P087d] "He used your mind exactly like that. That's why he left us sitting here like fools in Varna, while the ship carrying him quickly fled to Galatz, wrapped in thick fog. He has undoubtedly made complete preparations there to shake off our pursuit. But his childlike mind only saw what was right in front of his nose. As is always the case with God's great providence, the shallow trick that the villain firmly believed and relied on the most for his own selfish gain eventually returns to him as the most fatal harm. As the great Psalmist said, it's like a hunter caught in the very snare he set. Now he believes he has completely escaped from all of our relentless pursuit and has made a perfect getaway, buying himself plenty of time, so his selfish child's brain will whisper to him to sleep peacefully now. Also, because he has blocked himself from reading your mind, he is misjudging that you won't be able to know anything about him either. That is the painful mistake the monster made! The terrible baptism of blood he forced upon you paradoxically paved the way for your soul to fly to him, just as you had already been doing during the free hours of sunrise and sunset. During those times, you move according to your noble will, not his filthy will, and the good power for you and all of us, gained through the terrible suffering you endured from him, finally shines through. Since he knows absolutely nothing of this amazing fact and has even cut himself off from knowing where we are hiding to protect himself, this has now become a weapon more precious than gold to us. However, unlike that monster, we are not selfish, and even in all this terrible darkness and countless hours of despair, we firmly believe that the merciful God is always with us. We will track him to the ends of the earth and we will never back down. Even if we ourselves face the danger of becoming a terrible monster like him. Friend John, this was a truly great and historic hour. It has been a tremendous breakthrough for us moving forward. You act as the clerk and meticulously record all these amazing insights. So that when the others finish their work and return, we can show it to them right away. Then they too will see through everything, just as we do."