=== on_anger_book2_ch01_en.txt ===
[Book 2]

[Chapter 1]

My first book, Novatus, had a more abundant subject. For carriages roll easily downhill, but now we must proceed to drier matters. The question before us is whether anger arises from deliberate choice or from impulse. That is, whether it acts of its own accord or like the greater part of those passions which spring up within us without our knowledge. It is necessary for our debate to stoop to the consideration of these matters, in order that it may afterwards be able to rise to loftier themes. Likewise, in our bodies, the parts which are first set in order are the bones, sinews, and joints. These are by no means fair to see, albeit they are the foundation of our frame and essential to its life. Next to them come the parts of which all beauty of face and appearance consists. After these, color, which above all else charms the eye, is applied last of all when the rest of the body is complete.

There is no doubt that anger is roused by the appearance of an injury being done. But the question before us is whether anger straightway follows the appearance, and springs up without assistance from the mind, or whether it is roused with the sympathy of the mind. The Stoic opinion is that anger can venture upon nothing by itself, without the approval of mind. To conceive the idea of a wrong having been done, to long to avenge it, and to join the two propositions that we ought not to have been injured and that it is our duty to avenge our injuries, cannot belong to a mere impulse which is excited without our consent. That impulse is a simple act. This is a complex one, and composed of several parts. The man understands something to have happened, he becomes indignant thereat, he condemns the deed, and he avenges it. All these things cannot be done without his mind agreeing to those matters which touched him.
=== on_anger_book2_ch02_en.txt ===
[Chapter 2]

You might ask where this inquiry leads. It leads to us knowing what anger is. For if it springs up against our will, it never will yield to reason. All the motions which take place without our volition are beyond our control and unavoidable, such as shivering when cold water is poured over us, or shrinking when we are touched in certain places. Men's hair rises up at bad news, their faces blush at indecent words, and they are seized with dizziness when looking down a precipice. As it is not in our power to prevent any of these things, no reasoning can prevent their taking place. But anger can be put to flight by wise maxims. For it is a voluntary defect of the mind, and not one of those things which are evolved by the conditions of human life, and which, therefore, may happen even to the wisest of us.

Among these, and in the first place, must be ranked that thrill of the mind which seizes us at the thought of wrongdoing. We feel this even when witnessing the mimic scenes of the stage, or when reading about things that happened long ago. We often feel angry with Clodius for banishing Cicero, and with Antonius for murdering him. Everyone is indignant with the wars of Marius and the proscriptions of Sulla. Everyone is enraged against Theodotus and Achillas and the boy king who dared to commit a more than boyish crime. Sometimes songs excite us, and quickened rhythm and the martial noise of trumpets. So, too, shocking pictures and the dreadful sight of tortures, however well deserved, affect our minds. Hence it is that we smile when others are smiling, that a crowd of mourners makes us sad, and that we take a glowing interest in another's battles. All of these feelings are not anger, any more than that which clouds our brow at the sight of a stage shipwreck is sadness. What we feel when we read how Hannibal after Cannae beset the walls of Rome cannot be called fear. All these are emotions of minds which are loth to be moved. They are not passions, but rudiments which may grow into passions. So, too, a soldier starts at the sound of a trumpet, although he may be dressed as a civilian and in the midst of a profound peace, and camp horses prick up their ears at the clash of arms. It is said that Alexander, when Xenophantus was singing, laid his hand upon his weapons.
=== on_anger_book2_ch03_en.txt ===
[Chapter 3]

None of these things that casually influence the mind deserve to be called passions. The mind doesn't so much create these feelings as allow them to act upon it. A passion, therefore, doesn't consist of merely reacting to what we see. Instead, it involves giving in to our feelings and acting on these chance promptings.

If you think that turning pale, bursting into tears, feeling lust, sighing deeply, or getting a sudden flash in your eyes are true signs of passion that reveal the state of the mind, you are mistaken. You must understand that these are merely physical impulses of the body. The bravest of men often turns pale while putting on his armor. When the signal for battle is given, the knees of the boldest soldier might shake for a moment. A great general's heart might leap into his throat just before the armies clash. Even the most eloquent speaker's hands and feet might grow cold and stiff while preparing to begin a speech.

Anger doesn't just stir us, it breaks boundaries because it is a strong impulse, and no impulse can happen without the mind's consent. It is impossible to pursue revenge and punishment without the mind being fully aware of it.

A man might feel injured and want to avenge his wrongs, but then someone might persuade him to give up his intention and calm down. I do not call that anger. That is just a mental emotion still under the control of reason. Real anger goes beyond reason and carries it away.

Therefore, the first moment of confusion when your mind is struck by a perceived injury is no more anger than the apparent injury itself. The real anger is the subsequent mad rush. This rush not only absorbs the impression of the injury but acts on it as if it were entirely true. That is anger, an excitation of the mind toward revenge, proceeding from choice and deliberate resolve.

There has never been any doubt that fear causes us to flee and anger causes us to charge forward. Consider, then, whether you believe anything can be actively sought out or avoided without the mind's direct participation.
=== on_anger_book2_ch04_en.txt ===
[Chapter 4]

To understand how passions begin, swell, and gain momentum, you must know that the first emotion is involuntary. It acts as a preparation or a warning sign of a passion to come.

The second stage comes with a desire, though not a stubborn one. You might think, "It is my duty to avenge myself because I have been injured," or, "It is right that this man should be punished because he committed a crime."

The third stage is completely beyond our control. It overrides reason entirely and seeks revenge regardless of whether it is justified or not.

We cannot use reason to escape that first mental impression, just as we cannot escape our physical reflexes. We cannot prevent ourselves from yawning when we see someone else yawn, and we cannot help blinking when fingers suddenly dart toward our eyes. Reason cannot overcome these automatic reactions, though they might be weakened through practice and constant watchfulness. However, these reflexes are completely different from an emotion, which is created and ended by a deliberate act of the mind.
=== on_anger_book2_ch05_en.txt ===
[Chapter 5]

We must also enquire whether those whose cruelty knows no bounds, and who delight in shedding human blood, are angry when they kill people from whom they have received no injury. We mean people who they themselves do not think have done them any injury, such as Apollodorus or Phalaris. This is not anger, it is ferocity. For it does not do hurt because it has received injury, but is even willing to receive injury provided it may do hurt. It does not long to inflict stripes and mangle bodies to avenge its wrongs, but for its own pleasure. The conclusion is clear. This evil takes its rise from anger. For anger, after it has by long use and indulgence made a man forget mercy and driven all feelings of human fellowship from his mind, passes finally into cruelty. Such men therefore laugh, rejoice, enjoy themselves greatly, and are as unlike as possible in countenance to angry men, since cruelty is their relaxation.

It is said that when Hannibal saw a trench full of human blood, he exclaimed, "Oh, what a beauteous sight!" He would have thought it even more beautiful if it had filled a river or a lake. It is no wonder that you should be charmed with this sight above all others, you who were born in bloodshed and brought up amid slaughter from a child. Fortune will follow you and favor your cruelty for twenty years, and will display to you everywhere the sight that you love. You will behold it both at Trasumene and at Cannae, and lastly at your own city of Carthage. Volesus, who not long ago under the Emperor Augustus was proconsul of Asia Minor, after he had one day beheaded three hundred persons, strutted out among the corpses with a haughty air, as though he had performed some grand and notable exploit, and exclaimed in Greek, "What a kingly action!" One can only imagine what this man would have done had he been really a king. This was not anger, but a greater and an incurable disease.
=== on_anger_book2_ch06_en.txt ===
[Chapter 6]

"Virtue," argues our adversary, "ought to be angry with what is base, just as she approves of what is honorable." This is as ridiculous as saying that virtue ought to be both mean and great. Yet this is what he means when he wants her to be raised and lowered, because joy at a good action is grand and glorious, while anger at another's sin is base and befits a narrow mind. Virtue will never be guilty of imitating vice while she is repressing it. She considers anger to deserve punishment for itself, since it often is even more criminal than the faults with which it is angry. To rejoice and be glad is the proper and natural function of virtue. It is as much beneath her dignity to be angry as to mourn. Now, sorrow is the companion of anger, and all anger ends in sorrow, either from remorse or from failure.

Secondly, if it be the part of the wise man to be angry with sins, he will be more angry the greater they are, and will often be angry. From which it follows that the wise man will not only be angry but irascible. Yet if we do not believe that great and frequent anger can find any place in the wise man's mind, we should set him altogether free from this passion. There can be no limit if he ought to be angry in proportion to what every man does. Because he will either be unjust if he is equally angry at unequal crimes, or he will be the most irascible of men if he blazes into wrath as often as crimes deserve his anger.
=== on_anger_book2_ch07_en.txt ===
[Chapter 7]

Nothing could be more unworthy of a wise person than letting their emotions depend on the wickedness of others. If that were the case, the great philosopher Socrates would never have been able to return home with the same calm expression he had when he left.

Furthermore, if it is the duty of a wise person to be angry at shameful deeds and to be upset by crimes, then no one is more miserable than the wise person. Their entire life would be spent in anger and grief. There would never be a moment where they do not see something deserving of blame. Whenever they leave the house, they will be forced to walk among criminals, misers, spendthrifts, and profligates who are perfectly happy being exactly who they are. They cannot turn their eyes in any direction without finding something shocking.

If they demand anger from themselves as often as reason calls for it, they will simply faint from exhaustion. Look at the thousands of people hurrying to the law courts at the break of day. Their causes are shameful, and their advocates are even worse. One person challenges his father's will, when he should have just behaved well enough to earn his inheritance. Another appears to accuse his own mother. A third comes to testify against someone for a crime that he himself is famously guilty of committing. Even the judge is often chosen to condemn people for doing exactly what he has done, while the audience takes the wrong side, easily swayed by the lawyer's smooth voice.
=== on_anger_book2_ch08_en.txt ===
[Chapter 8]

There is no need to dwell upon individual cases. Be assured, when you see the Forum crowded with a multitude, the Saepta swarming with people, or the great Circus, in which the greater part of the people find room to show themselves at once, that among them there are as many vices as there are men. Among those whom you see in the garb of peace there is no peace. For a small profit any one of them will attempt the ruin of another. No one can gain anything save by another's loss. They hate the fortunate and despise the unfortunate. They grudgingly endure the great, and oppress the small. They are fired by diverse lusts. They would wreck everything for the sake of a little pleasure or plunder. They live as though they were in a school of gladiators, fighting with the same people with whom they live. It is like a society of wild beasts, save that beasts are tame with one another, and refrain from biting their own species, whereas men tear one another, and gorge themselves upon one another. They differ from dumb animals in this alone, that the latter are tame with those who feed them, whereas the rage of the former preys on those very persons by whom they were brought up.
=== on_anger_book2_ch09_en.txt ===
[Chapter 9]

The wise man will never cease to be angry if he once begins, so full is every place of vices and crimes. More evil is done than can be healed by punishment. Men seem engaged in a vast race of wickedness. Every day there is greater eagerness to sin, less modesty. Throwing aside all reverence for what is better and more just, lust rushes wherever it thinks fit. Crimes are no longer committed by stealth, they take place before our eyes. Wickedness has become so general and gained such a footing in everyone's breast that innocence is no longer rare, but no longer exists. Men do not break the law singly, or a few at a time. Nay, they rise in all quarters at once, as though obeying some universal signal, to wipe out the boundaries of right and wrong.

"Host is not safe from guest, father-in-law from son. But seldom love exists betwixt brothers. Wives long to destroy their husbands, husbands long to slay their wives. Stepmothers deadly aconite prepare, and child-heirs wonder when their sires will die."

And how small a part of men's crimes are these! The poet has not described one people divided into two hostile camps, parents and children enrolled on opposite sides, Rome set on fire by the hand of a Roman. He does not mention troops of fierce horsemen scouring the country to track out the hiding places of the proscribed, wells defiled with poison, plagues created by human hands, or trenches dug by children round their beleaguered parents. He omits crowded prisons, conflagrations that consume whole cities, gloomy tyrannies, secret plots to establish despotisms and ruin peoples. Nor does he describe men glorying in those deeds which, as long as it was possible to repress them, were counted as crimes—I mean rape, debauchery, and lust. Add to these, public acts of national bad faith, broken treaties, everything that cannot defend itself carried off as plunder by the stronger, knaveries, thefts, frauds, and disownings of debt such as three of our present law courts would not suffice to deal with. If you want the wise man to be as angry as the atrocity of men's crimes requires, he must not merely be angry, but must go mad with rage.
=== on_anger_book2_ch10_en.txt ===
[Chapter 10]

You will rather think that we should not be angry with people's faults. It is absurd to be angry with those who stumble in the dark, or with deaf people who cannot hear orders, or with children because they forget their duty and interest themselves in the games and silly jokes of their companions. It is equally ridiculous to be angry with weaklings for being sick, for growing old, or becoming fatigued. Among the other misfortunes of humanity is this, that men's intellects are confused, and they not only cannot help going wrong, but love to go wrong. To avoid being angry with individuals, you must pardon the whole mass. You must grant forgiveness to the entire human race. If you are angry with young and old men because they do wrong, you will be angry with infants also, for they soon will do wrong. No one becomes angry with children, who are too young to comprehend distinctions. Yet, to be a human being is a greater and a better excuse than to be a child.

Thus are we born, as creatures liable to as many disorders of the mind as of the body. Not dull and slow-witted, but making a bad use of our keenness of wit, and leading one another into vice by our example. He who follows others who have started before him on the wrong road is surely excusable for having wandered on the highway. A general's severity may be shown in the case of individual deserters. But where a whole army deserts, it must needs be pardoned. What puts a stop to the wise man's anger is the number of sinners. He perceives how unjust and how dangerous it is to be angry with vices which all men share.

Heraclitus, whenever he came out of doors and beheld around him such a number of men who were living wretchedly, nay, rather perishing wretchedly, used to weep. He pitied all those who met him joyous and happy. He was of a gentle but too weak disposition, and he himself was one of those for whom he ought to have wept. Democritus, on the other hand, is said never to have appeared in public without laughing, so little did men's serious occupations appear serious to him. There is no room for anger. Everything ought either to move us to tears or to laughter. The wise man will not be angry with sinners. This is because he knows that no one is born wise, but becomes so. He knows that very few wise men are produced in any age, because he thoroughly understands the circumstances of human life. Now, no sane man is angry with nature. It would be foolish to be surprised that fruit did not hang on the thickets of a forest, or to wonder at bushes and thorns not being covered with some useful berry. No one is angry when nature excuses a defect.

The wise man, therefore, being tranquil, and dealing candidly with mistakes, not an enemy to but an improver of sinners, will go abroad every day in the following frame of mind: "Many men will meet me who are drunkards, lustful, ungrateful, greedy, and excited by the frenzy of ambition." He will view all these as benignly as a physician does his patients. When a man's ship leaks freely through its opened seams, he does not become angry with the sailors or the ship itself. Instead of that, he tries to remedy it. He shuts out some water, bales out some other, closes all the holes that he can see, and by ceaseless labor counteracts those which are out of sight and which let water into the hold. Nor does he relax his efforts because as much water as he pumps out runs in again. We need a long-breathed struggle against permanent and prolific evils. Not, indeed, to quell them, but merely to prevent their overpowering us.
=== on_anger_book2_ch11_en.txt ===
[Chapter 11]

"Anger is useful," our opponent argues, "because it helps avoid contempt and frightens bad men."

First of all, if anger is as strong as its threats, it becomes hateful for the same reason it becomes terrible. It is far more dangerous to be hated than to be despised. On the other hand, if anger lacks real strength, it becomes much more exposed to contempt and cannot avoid ridicule. After all, nothing is more pathetic than anger when it breaks out into meaningless ravings.

Moreover, just because some things are somewhat terrifying doesn't make them desirable. Wisdom doesn't want it said of a wise person, as it is of a wild beast, that the fear he inspires acts as his weapon. We fear fever, gout, and consuming ulcers, yet there is no good in them. On the contrary, they are despised, considered foul and base, and are feared for exactly this reason.

In the same way, anger is inherently hideous and should not be feared, yet many do fear it, just as children fear a hideous mask. We cannot ignore the fact that terror always backfires on the one who inspired it, and that no one is feared who is genuinely at peace themselves.

At this point, it is helpful to remember that verse by Laberius, which caught the fancy of the entire public when spoken in the theater during the height of the civil war: "He must fear many, whom so many fear."

Nature has ordained that whatever becomes great by causing fear in others is never free from fear itself. Look at how easily lions are disturbed by the faintest noises! Notice how excited the fiercest beasts become at strange shadows, voices, or smells! Whatever is a terror to others fears for itself.

Therefore, there is no reason for any wise person to want to be feared. No one should think that anger is anything great just because it strikes terror. Even the most despicable things are feared, like venomous vermin. A simple string tied with brightly colored feathers can stop the largest herds of wild beasts and guide them into traps, so it is no wonder it is called a "scarer." Foolish creatures are frightened by foolish things. The movement of chariots and the sight of their turning wheels drive lions back into their cages, and elephants are terrified by the squeals of pigs. Similarly, we fear anger just as children fear the dark, or wild beasts fear red feathers. Anger has nothing solid or valiant in itself; it only affects feeble minds.
=== on_anger_book2_ch12_en.txt ===
[Chapter 12]

"Wickedness," says our adversary, "must be removed from the system of nature, if you wish to remove anger. Neither of which things can be done." In the first place, it is possible for a man not to be cold, although according to the system of nature it may be winter-time, nor yet to suffer from heat, although it be summer according to the almanac. He may be protected against the inclement time of the year by dwelling in a favored spot, or he may have so trained his body to endurance that it feels neither heat nor cold. Next, reverse this saying. You must remove anger from your mind before you can take virtue into the same, because vices and virtues cannot combine. None can at the same time be both an angry man and a good man, any more than he can be both sick and well.

"It is not possible," says he, "to remove anger altogether from the mind, nor does human nature admit of it." Yet there is nothing so hard and difficult that the mind of man cannot overcome it, and with which unremitting study will not render him familiar. Nor are there any passions so fierce and independent that they cannot be tamed by discipline. The mind can carry out whatever orders it gives itself. Some have succeeded in never smiling. Some have forbidden themselves wine, sexual intercourse, or even drink of all kinds. Some, who are satisfied with short hours of rest, have learned to watch for long periods without weariness. Men have learned to run upon the thinnest ropes even when slanting, to carry huge burdens scarcely within the compass of human strength, or to dive to enormous depths and suffer themselves to remain under the sea without any chance of drawing breath. There are a thousand other instances in which application has conquered all obstacles, and proved that nothing which the mind has set itself to endure is difficult.

The men whom I have just mentioned gain either no reward or one that is unworthy of their unwearied application. A man gains no great thing by applying his intellect to walking upon a tight rope, or to placing great burdens upon his shoulders, or to keeping sleep from his eyes, or to reaching the bottom of the sea. And yet their patient labor brings all these things to pass for a trifling reward. We then should surely call in the aid of patience, we whom such a prize awaits, the unbroken calm of a happy life. It is a great blessing to escape from anger, that chief of all evils, and therewith from frenzy, ferocity, cruelty, and madness, its attendants.
=== on_anger_book2_ch13_en.txt ===
[Chapter 13]

There is no reason why we should seek to defend such a passion as this or excuse its excesses by declaring it to be either useful or unavoidable. Every vice, indeed, has its defenders. Yet this is no reason why you should declare anger to be ineradicable. The evils from which we suffer are curable. Since we were born with a natural bias towards good, nature herself will help us if we try to amend our lives. Nor is the path to virtue steep and rough, as some think it to be. It may be reached on level ground. This is no untrue tale which I come to tell you. The road to happiness is easy. Do you only enter upon it with good luck and the good help of the gods themselves.

It is much harder to do what you are doing. Nothing is more restful than a mind at peace, and nothing more toilsome than anger. Nothing is more at leisure than clemency, and nothing fuller of business than cruelty. Modesty keeps holiday while vice is overwhelmed with work. In fine, the culture of any of the virtues is easy, while vices require a great expense. Anger ought to be removed from our minds. Even those who say that it ought to be kept low admit this to some extent. Let it be got rid of altogether. There is nothing to be gained by it. Without it we can more easily and more justly put an end to crime, punish bad men, and amend their lives. The wise man will do his duty in all things without the help of any evil passion, and will use no auxiliaries which require watching narrowly lest they get beyond his control.
=== on_anger_book2_ch14_en.txt ===
[Chapter 14]

Anger, then, must never become a habit with us. However, we may sometimes pretend to be angry when we need to rouse the dull minds of those we are speaking to, much like we rouse slow-starting horses with spurs and firebrands.

We must sometimes use fear on people upon whom reason makes no impression. Yet, actually being angry is no more useful than being sorrowful or afraid.

You might argue that circumstances arise that provoke us to anger.

Yes, they do. But those are the very times we ought to choke down our wrath the most. Nor is it difficult to conquer our spirit. Consider athletes, who devote their entire attention to the basest physical parts of themselves. They are still able to endure blows and pain to exhaust the strength of the person striking them. They do not strike back when anger bids them to, but only when the right opportunity invites them.

It is said that Pyrrhus, the most celebrated trainer for gymnastic contests, used to constantly remind his pupils never to lose their tempers. Anger ruins their technique and thinks only of how it can hurt someone. As a result, reason often counsels patience while anger counsels revenge. By giving in to anger, we who might have survived our initial misfortunes are exposed to even worse ones.

Some people have been driven into exile because they couldn't endure a single contemptuous word. Others have been plunged into the deepest miseries because they refused to suffer the most trifling wrong in silence. And some have brought the yoke of slavery upon themselves because they were too proud to compromise even the smallest part of their total liberty.
=== on_anger_book2_ch15_en.txt ===
[Chapter 15]

"That you may be sure," says our opponent, "that anger has in it something noble, pray look at the free nations, such as the Germans and Scythians, who are especially prone to anger." The reason of this is that stout and daring intellects are liable to anger before they are tamed by discipline. For some passions engraft themselves upon the better class of dispositions only, just as good land, even when waste, grows strong brushwood, and the trees are tall which stand upon a fertile soil. In like manner, dispositions which are naturally bold produce irritability, and, being hot and fiery, have no mean or trivial qualities. But their energy is misdirected, as happens with all those who without training come to the front by their natural advantages alone. Their minds, unless they be brought under control, degenerate from a courageous temper into habits of rashness and reckless daring.

Our opponent might claim that milder spirits are linked with gentler vices, such as tenderness of heart, love, and bashfulness. This is true, and therefore I can often point out to you a good disposition by its own faults. Yet their being the proofs of a superior nature does not prevent their being vices. Moreover, all those nations which are free because they are wild, like lions or wolves, cannot command any more than they can obey. For the strength of their intellect is not civilized, but fierce and unmanageable. Now, no one is able to rule unless he is also able to be ruled. Consequently, the empire of the world has almost always remained in the hands of those nations who enjoy a milder climate. Those who dwell near the frozen north have uncivilized tempers—

"Just on the model of their native skies,"

as the poet has it.
=== on_anger_book2_ch16_en.txt ===
[Chapter 16]

Our opponent argues, "The animals considered to be the most noble are those with a large capacity for anger."

He is mistaken when he holds up creatures that act from impulse instead of reason as models for humans to follow. In humans, reason takes the place of impulse.

Furthermore, even among animals, different traits benefit different creatures. Anger is useful to lions, just as timidity is useful to stags, boldness to hawks, and flight to doves. It isn't even true that the best animals are the most prone to anger. I suppose wild beasts that get their food by violence might be better the angrier they are. But I would praise oxen and horses who obey the reins because of their patience.

There is no reason, however, for pointing mankind toward such wretched models. You have the entire universe and God, whom humans alone among the animals imitate because we alone can comprehend Him.

Our opponent then says, "The most irritable people are often thought to be the most straightforward of all."

They are only thought of that way because they are compared to swindlers and cheaters. They appear simple because they are outspoken. I would not call such men simple; I would call them heedless. We give the title of "simple" to all fools, gluttons, spendthrifts, and anyone whose vices are entirely on the surface.
=== on_anger_book2_ch17_en.txt ===
[Chapter 17]

"An orator," says our opponent, "sometimes speaks better when he is angry." Not so, but when he pretends to be angry. For so also actors bring down the house by their playing, not when they are really angry, but when they act the angry man well. In like manner, in addressing a jury or a popular assembly, or in any other position in which the minds of others have to be influenced at our pleasure, we must ourselves pretend to feel anger, fear, or pity before we can make others feel them. Often the pretense of passion will do what the passion itself could not have done. 

"The mind which does not feel anger," says he, "is feeble." True, if it has nothing stronger than anger to support it. A man ought to be neither robber nor victim, neither tender-hearted nor cruel. The former belongs to an over-weak mind, the latter to an over-hard one. Let the wise man be moderate, and when things have to be done somewhat briskly, let him call force, not anger, to his aid.
=== on_anger_book2_ch18_en.txt ===
[Chapter 18]

Now that we have discussed the main questions concerning anger, let us move on to its remedies. These, I believe, are two-fold: the first class prevents us from becoming angry, and the second prevents us from doing wrong when we are already angry. Just as we adopt a certain routine to keep our bodies healthy and use different rules to bring our health back when we are sick, we must repel anger in one way and quench it in another.

To avoid it entirely, there are certain general rules of conduct that apply to everyone's lives which must be impressed upon us. We can divide these into rules that are useful during the education of the young, and rules that are useful in later life.

Education must be carried out with the greatest and most helpful consistency. It is easy to mold minds while they are still tender, but it is extremely difficult to uproot vices that have grown up alongside us as adults.
=== on_anger_book2_ch19_en.txt ===
[Chapter 19]

A hot mind is naturally the most prone to anger. For as there are four elements, consisting of fire, air, earth, and water, so there are powers corresponding and equivalent to each of these, namely, hot, cold, dry, and moist. Now the mixture of the elements is the cause of the diversities of lands and of animals, of bodies and of character. Our dispositions incline to one or the other of these according as the strength of each element prevails in us. Hence it is that we call some regions wet or dry, warm or cold. The same distinctions apply likewise to animals and mankind. It makes a great difference how much moisture or heat a man contains. His character will partake of whichever element has the largest share in him. A warm temper of mind will make men prone to anger. For fire is full of movement and vigor. A mixture of coldness makes men cowards, for cold is sluggish and contracted. Because of this, some of our Stoics think that anger is excited in our breasts by the boiling of the blood round the heart. Indeed, that place is assigned to anger for no other reason than because the breast is the warmest part of the whole body.

Those who have more moisture in them become angry by slow degrees, because they have no heat ready at hand, but it has to be obtained by movement. Therefore the anger of women and children is sharp rather than strong, and arises on lighter provocation. At dry times of life anger is violent and powerful, yet without increase, and adding little to itself, because as heat dies away cold takes its place. Old men are testy and full of complaints, as also are sick people and convalescents, and all whose store of heat has been consumed by weariness or loss of blood. Those who are wasted by thirst or hunger are in the same condition, as also are those whose frame is naturally bloodless and faints from want of generous diet. Wine kindles anger, because it increases heat. According to each man's disposition, some fly into a passion when they are heavily drunk, some when they are slightly drunk. Nor is there any other reason than this why yellow-haired, ruddy-complexioned people should be excessively passionate, seeing that they are naturally of the color which others put on during anger. For their blood is hot and easily set in motion.
=== on_anger_book2_ch20_en.txt ===
[Chapter 20]

But just as nature makes some men prone to anger, so there are many other causes which have the same power as nature. Some are brought into this condition by disease or bodily injury, others by hard work, long watching, nights of anxiety, ardent longings, and love. Everything else which is hurtful to the body or the spirit inclines the distempered mind to find fault. All these, however, are but the beginning and causes of anger. Habit of mind has very great power, and, if it be harsh, increases the disorder. As for nature, it is difficult to alter it, nor may we change the mixture of the elements which was formed once for all at our birth. Yet knowledge will be so far of service, that we should keep wine out of the reach of hot-tempered men, which Plato thinks ought also to be forbidden to boys, so that fire be not made fiercer. Neither should such men be over-fed. For if so, their bodies will swell, and their minds will swell with them.

Such men ought to take exercise, stopping short, however, of fatigue, in order that their natural heat may be abated, but not exhausted, and their excess of fiery spirit may be worked off. Games also will be useful. For moderate pleasure relieves the mind and brings it to a proper balance. With those temperaments which incline to moisture, or dryness and stiffness, there is no danger of anger, but there is fear of greater vices, such as cowardice, moroseness, despair, and suspiciousness. Such dispositions therefore ought to be softened, comforted, and restored to cheerfulness. Since we must make use of different remedies for anger and for sullenness, and these two vices require not only unlike, but absolutely opposite modes of treatment, let us always attack that one of them which is gaining the mastery.
=== on_anger_book2_ch21_en.txt ===
[Chapter 21]

It is, I assure you, of the greatest service to boys that they should be soundly brought up. Yet to regulate their education is difficult, because it is our duty to be careful neither to cherish a habit of anger in them, nor to blunt the edge of their spirit. This needs careful watching, for both qualities, both those which are to be encouraged and those which are to be checked, are fed by the same things. Even a careful watcher may be deceived by their likeness. A boy's spirit is increased by freedom and depressed by slavery. It rises when praised, and is led to conceive great expectations of itself. Yet this same treatment produces arrogance and quickness of temper. We must therefore guide him between these two extremes, using the curb at one time and the spur at another. He must undergo no servile or degrading treatment. He never must beg abjectly for anything, nor must he gain anything by begging. Let him rather receive it for his own sake, for his past good behavior, or for his promises of future good conduct.

In contests with his comrades we ought not to allow him to become sulky or fly into a passion. Let us see that he be on friendly terms with those whom he contends with, so that in the struggle itself he may learn to wish not to hurt his antagonist but to conquer him. Whenever he has gained the day or done something praiseworthy, we should allow him to enjoy his victory, but not to rush into transports of delight. For joy leads to exultation, and exultation leads to swaggering and excessive self-esteem. We ought to allow him some relaxation, yet not yield him up to laziness and sloth, and we ought to keep him far beyond the reach of luxury. For nothing makes children more prone to anger than a soft and fond bringing-up, so that the more only children are indulged, and the more liberty is given to orphans, the more they are corrupted. He to whom nothing is ever denied will not be able to endure a rebuff, whose anxious mother always wipes away his tears, whose tutor is made to pay for his shortcomings.

You can observe how a man's anger becomes more violent as he rises in station. This shows itself especially in those who are rich and noble, or in great place, when the favoring gale has roused all the most empty and trivial passions of their minds. Prosperity fosters anger when a man's proud ears are surrounded by a mob of flatterers saying, "That man answer you! You do not act according to your dignity, you lower yourself." And so forth, with all the language which can hardly be resisted even by healthy and originally well-principled minds.

Flattery, then, must be kept well out of the way of children. Let a child hear the truth, and sometimes fear it. Let him always reverence it. Let him rise in the presence of his elders. Let him obtain nothing by flying into a passion. Let him be given when he is quiet what was refused him when he cried for it. Let him behold, but not make use of his father's wealth. Let him be reproved for what he does wrong. It will be advantageous to furnish boys with even-tempered teachers and tutors. What is soft and unformed clings to what is near, and takes its shape. The habits of young men reproduce those of their nurses and tutors. Once, a boy who was brought up in Plato's house went home to his parents, and, on seeing his father shouting with passion, said, "I never saw anyone at Plato's house act like that." I doubt not that he learned to imitate his father sooner than he learned to imitate Plato. Above all, let his food be scanty, his dress not costly, and of the same fashion as that of his comrades. If you begin by putting him on a level with many others, he will not be angry when someone is compared with him.
=== on_anger_book2_ch22_en.txt ===
[Chapter 22]

These precepts, however, apply to our children. In ourselves the accident of birth and our education no longer admits of either mistakes or advice, we must deal with what follows. Now we ought to fight against the first causes of evil. The cause of anger is the belief that we are injured. This belief, therefore, should not be lightly entertained. We ought not to fly into a rage even when the injury appears to be open and distinct, for some false things bear the semblance of truth. We should always allow some time to elapse, for time discloses the truth. Let not our ears be easily lent to calumnious talk. Let us know and be on our guard against this fault of human nature, that we are willing to believe what we are unwilling to listen to, and that we become angry before we have formed our opinion. We are influenced not merely by calumnies but by suspicions, and at the very look and smile of others we may fly into a rage with innocent persons because we put the worst construction upon it. We ought, therefore, to plead the cause of the absent against ourselves, and to keep our anger in abeyance. For a punishment which has been postponed may yet be inflicted, but when once inflicted cannot be recalled.
=== on_anger_book2_ch23_en.txt ===
[Chapter 23]

Everyone knows the story of the tyrant-slayer who was caught before he could accomplish his task. While being tortured by Hippias to make him betray his accomplices, he deliberately named the friends of the tyrant who stood around, including everyone he knew the tyrant loved the most. As the tyrant ordered each man to be slain as soon as he was named, he finally asked the prisoner if anyone else remained. The man replied, "You remain alone, for I have left no one else alive to whom you are dear."

Anger had actually made the tyrant help the tyrant-slayer and cut down his own guards with his own sword!

Alexander the Great was far more courageous. After reading his mother's letter warning him to beware of poison from his physician, Philip, he undismayed drank the medicine that Philip handed him. He felt complete confidence in his friend. He believed that his friend deserved to be innocent, and that his own trusting behavior would make him innocent. I praise Alexander's actions all the more because he was above all men prone to anger; but the rarer moderation is among kings, the more it deserves to be praised.

The great Julius Caesar, who proved to be such a merciful conqueror during the civil war, did exactly the same thing. He burned a packet of letters addressed to his enemy, Pompey, written by people who were thought to be either neutral or on the opposing side. Although Caesar was never violent in his anger, he preferred to put it entirely out of his own power to be angry. He thought that the kindest way to pardon each of them was simply not to know what their offense had been.
=== on_anger_book2_ch24_en.txt ===
[Chapter 24]

Readiness to believe what we hear causes very great mischief. We ought often not even to listen, because in some cases it is better to be deceived than to suspect deceit. We ought to free our minds of suspicion and mistrust, those most untrustworthy causes of anger. "This man's greeting was far from civil. That one would not receive my kiss. One cut short a story I had begun to tell. Another did not ask me to dinner. Another seemed to view me with aversion." Suspicion will never lack grounds. What we want is straightforwardness, and a kindly interpretation of things. Let us believe nothing unless it forces itself upon our sight and is unmistakable, and let us reprove ourselves for being too ready to believe, as often as our suspicions prove to be groundless. For this discipline will render us habitually slow to believe what we hear.
=== on_anger_book2_ch25_en.txt ===
[Chapter 25]

Another consequence of this will be that we shall not be exasperated by the slightest and most contemptible trifles. It is mere madness to be put out of temper because a slave is not quick, because the water we are going to drink is lukewarm, or because our couch is disarranged or our table carelessly laid. A man must be in a miserably bad state of health if he shrinks from a gentle breath of wind. His eyes must be diseased if they are distressed by the sight of white clothing. He must be broken down with debauchery if he feels pain at seeing another man work. 

It is said that there was one Mindyrides, a citizen of Sybaris, who one day seeing a man digging and vigorously brandishing a mattock, complained that the sight made him weary, and forbade the man to work where he could see him. The same man complained that he had suffered from the rose leaves upon which he lay being folded double. When pleasures have corrupted both the body and the mind, nothing seems endurable, not indeed because it is hard, but because he who has to bear it is soft. There is no good reason why we should be driven to frenzy by anyone's coughing and sneezing, or by a fly not being driven away with sufficient care, or by a dog's hanging about us, or a key dropping from a careless servant's hand.

One whose ears are agonized by the noise of a bench being dragged along the floor will never be able to endure with unruffled mind the rude language of party strife, and the abuse which speakers in the forum or the senate house heap upon their opponents. He who is angry with his slave for icing his drink badly will not be able to endure hunger, or the thirst of a long march in summer. Nothing, therefore, nourishes anger more than excessive and dissatisfied luxury. The mind ought to be hardened by rough treatment, so as not to feel any blow that is not severe.
=== on_anger_book2_ch26_en.txt ===
[Chapter 26]

We get angry either with those who can do us an injury or with those who cannot. To the latter class belong inanimate things, such as a book, which we often throw away when its letters are too small to read, or tear up when it is full of mistakes. We might destroy clothes because we do not like the way they look.

How foolish to be angry with things that can neither deserve nor feel our anger!

"But of course," someone might argue, "it is the makers of those things who really affront us."

To this I answer that, first of all, we often become angry before making this distinction clear in our minds. Secondly, perhaps even the makers might put forward reasonable excuses. One of them might simply be unable to make the item any better than he did. His lack of skill in his trade is not intended as a sign of disrespect to you. Another person may have done his work without any intention of insulting you whatsoever. Finally, nothing could be more crazy than taking out the ill feeling you have accumulated against people onto inanimate things.

Just as it is the act of a madman to be angry with inanimate objects, it is equally crazy to be angry with dumb animals. Animals cannot do us wrong because they are not able to form a deliberate purpose, and we cannot call anything a wrong unless it is done intentionally. They can certainly hurt us, just as a sword or a stone might, but they cannot actively do us a wrong.

Yet, some people think they are insulted when the very same horses that are docile with one rider become restless with another. They act as though the horses made a deliberate choice to be difficult, rather than recognizing that some horses are just more easily managed by some riders through habit and clever handling. Just as it is foolish to be angry with animals, it is equally foolish to be angry with children and with adults who have little more sense than children. Before a just judge, ignorance is just as effective an excuse as innocence.
=== on_anger_book2_ch27_en.txt ===
[Chapter 27]

There are some things that are simply unable to hurt us, and whose power is completely beneficial and helpful. For example, the immortal gods neither wish to do harm, nor are they able to do so. Their temperament is naturally gentle and tranquil, and they are no more likely to wrong others than to wrong themselves.

Foolish people who do not know the truth hold the gods responsible for storms at sea, excessive rain, and long winters. But all the while, these natural phenomena, which we either suffer from or profit by, take place without any reference to us at all. It is not for our sake that the universe causes summer and winter to follow one another. These seasons have a law of their own, according to which their divine functions are performed. We think too much of ourselves when we imagine that we are so important that the universe makes these huge changes just for us. None of these things happen to injure us. On the contrary, they all tend toward our benefit.

I mentioned that there are some things which cannot hurt us, and some things which simply would not want to. To this latter class belong good people in authority, good parents, teachers, and judges. We ought to submit to their punishments in the same spirit in which we undergo the surgeon's knife, endure a temporary fast from food, or suffer through similar things that hurt us only for our benefit.

Suppose we are being punished. Let us not just think about what we suffer, but about what we have done. Let us sit in judgment on our own past lives. Provided we are willing to tell ourselves the truth, we will certainly decide that our crimes deserve a much harsher penalty than they actually received.
=== on_anger_book2_ch28_en.txt ===
[Chapter 28]

If we desire to be impartial judges of all that takes place, we must first convince ourselves of this, that no one of us is faultless. For it is from this that most of our indignation proceeds. "I have not sinned, I have done no wrong." Say, rather, you do not admit that you have done any wrong. We are infuriated at being reproved, either by reprimand or actual chastisement, although we are sinning at that very time by adding insolence and obstinacy to our wrongdoings. 

No one can declare himself to have broken no laws. Even if there be such a man, what a stinted innocence it is, merely to be innocent by the letter of the law. The rules of duty extend much further than those of the law. Many things which are not to be found in the statute book are demanded by filial feeling, kindness, generosity, equity, and honor. Yet we are not able to warrant ourselves even to come under that first narrowest definition of innocence. We have done what was wrong, thought what was wrong, wished for what was wrong, and encouraged what was wrong. In some cases we have only remained innocent because we did not succeed. When we think of this, let us deal more justly with sinners, and believe that those who scold us are right. In any case let us not be angry with ourselves (for we would have to be angry with everyone, if we are angry even with our own selves), and least of all with the gods. For whatever we suffer befalls us not by any ordinance of theirs but of the common law of all flesh. 

"But diseases and pains attack us." Well, people who live in a crazy dwelling must have some way of escape from it. Someone will be said to have spoken ill of you. Think whether you did not first speak ill of him. Think of how many persons you have yourself spoken ill. Let us not, I say, suppose that others are doing us a wrong, but are repaying one which we have done them, that some are acting with good intentions, some under compulsion, some in ignorance. Let us believe that even he who does so intentionally and knowingly did not wrong us merely for the sake of wronging us, but was led into doing so by the attraction of saying something witty. Or did whatever he did, not out of any spite against us, but because he himself could not succeed unless he pushed us back. We are often offended by flattery even while it is being lavished upon us. Yet whoever recalls to his mind how often he himself has been the victim of undeserved suspicion, how often fortune has given his true service an appearance of wrongdoing, how many persons he has begun by hating and ended by loving, will be able to keep himself from becoming angry straightway. Especially if he silently says to himself when each offense is committed: "I have done this very thing myself." 

It is hard to find so impartial a judge. The same man who lusts after everyone's wife, and thinks that a woman's belonging to someone else is a sufficient reason for adoring her, will not allow anyone else to look at his own wife. No man expects such exact fidelity as a traitor. The perjurer himself takes vengeance of him who breaks his word. The pettifogging lawyer is most indignant at an action being brought against him. The man who is reckless of his own chastity cannot endure any attempt upon that of his slaves. We have other men's vices before our eyes, and our own behind our backs. Hence it is that a father, who is worse than his son, blames the latter for giving extravagant feasts, and disapproves of the least sign of luxury in another, although he was wont to set no bounds to it in his own case. Hence it is that despots are angry with homicides, and thefts are punished by those who despoil temples. A great part of mankind is not angry with sins, but with sinners. Regard to our own selves will make us more moderate, if we inquire of ourselves whether we have ever committed any crime of this sort, whether we have ever fallen into this kind of error, and whether it is for our interest that we should condemn this conduct.
=== on_anger_book2_ch29_en.txt ===
[Chapter 29]

The greatest remedy for anger is delay. Beg anger to grant you this at the first, not in order that it may pardon the offense, but that it may form a right judgment about it. If it delays, it will come to an end. Do not attempt to quell it all at once, for its first impulses are fierce. By plucking away its parts we shall remove the whole. 

We are made angry by some things which we learn at secondhand, and by some which we ourselves hear or see. Now, we ought to be slow to believe what is told us. Many tell lies in order to deceive us, and many because they are themselves deceived. Some seek to win our favor by false accusations, and invent wrongs in order that they may appear angry at our having suffered them. One man lies out of spite, that he may set trusting friends at variance. Some because they are suspicious, and wish to see sport, and watch from a safe distance those whom they have set by the ears. 

If you were about to give sentence in court about ever so small a sum of money, you would take nothing as proved without a witness, and a witness would count for nothing except on his oath. You would allow both sides to be heard. You would allow them time. You would not dispatch the matter at one sitting, because the oftener it is handled the more distinctly the truth appears. You should not condemn your friend offhand. You should not be angry with him before you hear his story, before you have cross-examined him, before he can know either who is his accuser or with what he is charged. You know you should hear what is said on both sides just as you did in the case which you just tried. This very man who has informed against your friend will say no more if he be obliged to prove what he says. "You need not," says he, "bring me forward as a witness. If I am brought forward I shall deny what I have said. Unless you excuse me from appearing I shall never tell you anything." At the same time he spurs you on and withdraws himself from the strife and battle. The man who will tell you nothing save in secret hardly tells you anything at all. Nothing can be more unjust than to believe in secret, and to be angry openly.
=== on_anger_book2_ch30_en.txt ===
[Chapter 30]

Some offenses we ourselves witness. In these cases let us examine the disposition and purpose of the offender. Perhaps he is a child. Let us pardon his youth, he knows not whether he is doing wrong. Or he is a father. He has either rendered such great services as to have won the right even to wrong us, or perhaps this very act which offends us is his chief merit. Or a woman. Well, she made a mistake. The man did it because he was ordered to do it. Only an unjust person can be angry with what is done under compulsion. You had hurt him. Well, there is no wrong in suffering the pain which you have been the first to inflict. 

Suppose that your opponent is a judge. Then you ought to take his opinion rather than your own. Or that he is a king. Then, if he punishes the guilty, yield to him because he is just, and if he punishes the innocent, yield to him because he is powerful. Suppose that it is a dumb animal or as stupid as a dumb animal. Then, if you are angry with it, you will make yourself like it. Suppose that it is a disease or a misfortune. It will take less effect upon you if you bear it quietly. Or that it is a god. Then you waste your time by being angry with him as much as if you prayed him to be angry with someone else. If it is a good man who has wronged you, do not believe it. If it is a bad one, do not be surprised at this. He will pay to someone else the penalty which he owes to you. Indeed, by his sin he has already punished himself.
=== on_anger_book2_ch31_en.txt ===
[Chapter 31]

There are, as I have stated, two cases which produce anger. First, when we appear to have received an injury, about which enough has been said, and, secondly, when we appear to have been treated unjustly. This must now be discussed. Men think some things unjust because they ought not to suffer them, and some because they did not expect to suffer them. We think what is unexpected is beneath our deserts. Consequently, we are especially excited at what befalls us contrary to our hope and expectation. This is why we are irritated at the smallest trifles in our own domestic affairs, and why we call our friends' carelessness deliberate injury. 

Our opponent asks how it is, then, that we are angered by the injuries inflicted by our enemies. It is because we did not expect those particular injuries, or, at any rate, not on so extensive a scale. This is caused by our excessive self-love. We think that we ought to remain uninjured even by our enemies. Every man bears within his breast the mind of a despot, and is willing to commit excesses, but unwilling to submit to them. Thus it is either ignorance or arrogance that makes us angry. It is ignorance of common facts. There is nothing to wonder at in bad men committing evil deeds. There is no novelty in your enemy hurting you, your friend quarreling with you, your son going wrong, or your servant doing amiss. Fabius was wont to say that the most shameful excuse a general could make was "I did not think." I think it the most shameful excuse that a man can make. Think of everything, expect everything. Even with men of good character something queer will crop up. Human nature produces minds that are treacherous, ungrateful, greedy, and impious. When you are considering what any man's morals may be, think what those of mankind are. 

When you are especially enjoying yourself, be especially on your guard. When everything seems to you to be peaceful, be sure that mischief is not absent, but only asleep. Always believe that something will occur to offend you. A pilot never spreads all his canvas abroad so confidently as not to keep his tackle for shortening sail ready for use. Think, above all, how base and hateful is the power of doing mischief, and how unnatural in man, by whose kindness even fierce animals are rendered tame. See how bulls yield their necks to the yoke, how elephants allow boys and women to dance on their backs unhurt, how snakes glide harmlessly over our bosoms and among our drinking cups, how within their dens bears and lions submit to be handled with complacent mouths, and wild beasts fawn upon their master. Let us blush to have exchanged habits with wild beasts. 

It is a crime to injure one's country. So it is, therefore, to injure any of our countrymen, for he is a part of our country. If the whole be sacred, the parts must be sacred too. Therefore it is also a crime to injure any man, for he is your fellow-citizen in a larger state. It would be absurd if the hands were to wish to hurt the feet, or the eyes to hurt the hands. As all the limbs act in unison, because it is the interest of the whole body to keep each one of them safe, so men should spare one another, because they are born for society. The bond of society, however, cannot exist unless it guards and loves all its members. We should not even destroy vipers and water-snakes and other creatures whose teeth and claws are dangerous, if we were able to tame them as we do other animals, or to prevent their being a peril to us. Neither ought we, therefore, to hurt a man because he has done wrong, but lest he should do wrong. Our punishment should always look to the future, and never to the past, because it is inflicted in a spirit of precaution, not of anger. For if everyone who has a crooked and vicious disposition were to be punished, no one would escape punishment.
=== on_anger_book2_ch32_en.txt ===
[Chapter 32]

You might say, "But anger possesses a certain pleasure of its own, and it is sweet to pay back the pain you have suffered."

Not at all. It is not honorable to repay injuries with more injuries, in the same way that it is honorable to repay benefits with benefits. When it comes to benefits, it is a shame to be outdone. But when it comes to injuries, it is a shame to be the one who outdoes the other.

Revenge and retaliation are words that people use, and many even consider them to be righteous concepts. Yet, they do not greatly differ from wrong-doing, except in the order in which they happen. The person who returns pain for pain simply has slightly more excuse for his bad behavior, and that is all.

Once, a man who did not recognize Marcus Cato struck him in the public bath out of sheer ignorance, since no one would knowingly do Cato an injury. Later, when the man came to apologize, Cato simply replied, "I do not remember being struck." He thought it was much better to ignore the insult than to seek revenge.

You might ask if any harm befell that man for his insolence.

No, rather, much good came to him. He actually got to meet Cato.

It is the mark of a great mind to despise the wrongs done to it. The most contemptuous form of revenge is to simply decide that your adversary isn't even worth taking vengeance upon. By taking revenge, many people have taken small injuries much more seriously to heart than they ever needed to. The truly great and noble person is like a large, powerful wild animal who listens unmoved to the tiny dogs barking at him.
=== on_anger_book2_ch33_en.txt ===
[Chapter 33]

"We are treated," says our opponent, "with more respect if we revenge our injuries." If we make use of revenge merely as a remedy, let us use it without anger, and not regard revenge as pleasant, but as useful. Yet often it is better to pretend not to have received an injury than to avenge it. The wrongs of the powerful must not only be borne, but borne with a cheerful countenance. They will repeat the wrong if they think they have inflicted it. This is the worst trait of minds rendered arrogant by prosperity, they hate those whom they have injured. Everyone knows the saying of the old courtier, who, when someone asked him how he had achieved the rare distinction of living at court till he reached old age, replied, "By receiving wrongs and returning thanks for them." 

It is often so far from expedient to avenge our wrongs, that it will not do even to admit them. Gaius Caesar, offended at the smart clothes and well-dressed hair of the son of Pastor, a distinguished Roman knight, sent him to prison. When the father begged that his son might suffer no harm, Caius, as if reminded by this to put him to death, ordered him to be executed. Yet, in order to mitigate his brutality to the father, invited him that very day to dinner. Pastor came with a countenance which betrayed no ill will. Caesar pledged him in a glass of wine, and set a man to watch him. The wretched creature went through his part, feeling as though he were drinking his son's blood. The emperor sent him some perfume and a garland, and gave orders to watch whether he used them. He did so. On the very day on which he had buried, nay, on which he had not even buried his son, he sat down as one of a hundred guests, and, old and gouty as he was, drank to an extent which would have been hardly decent on a child's birthday. He shed no tear the while. He did not permit his grief to betray itself by the slightest sign. He dined just as though his entreaties had gained his son's life. 

You ask me why he did so. He had another son. In the Iliad, Priam concealed his wrath and embraced the knees of Achilles. He raised to his lips that death-dealing hand, stained with the blood of his son, and supped with his slayer. True! But there were no perfumes and garlands, and his fierce enemy encouraged him with many soothing words to eat, not to drain huge goblets with a guard standing over him to see that he did it. Had he only feared for himself, the father would have treated the tyrant with scorn. But love for his son quenched his anger. He deserved the emperor's permission to leave the banquet and gather up the bones of his son. But, meanwhile, that kindly and polite youth the emperor would not even permit him to do this, but tormented the old man with frequent invitations to drink, advising him thereby to lighten his sorrows. He, on the other hand, appeared to be in good spirits, and to have forgotten what had been done that day. He would have lost his second son had he proved an unacceptable guest to the murderer of his eldest.
=== on_anger_book2_ch34_en.txt ===
[Chapter 34]

We must, therefore, refrain from anger, whether he who provokes us be on a level with ourselves, or above us, or below us. A contest with one's equal is of uncertain issue, with one's superior is folly, and with one's inferior is contemptible. It is the part of a mean and wretched man to turn and bite one's biter. Even mice and ants show their teeth if you put your hand to them, and all feeble creatures think that they are hurt if they are touched. It will make us milder tempered to call to mind any services which he with whom we are angry may have done us, and to let his deserts balance his offense. Let us also reflect how much credit the tale of our forgiveness will confer upon us, how many men may be made into valuable friends by forgiveness. 

One of the lessons which Sulla's cruelty teaches us is not to be angry with the children of our enemies, whether they be public or private, for he drove the sons of the proscribed into exile. Nothing is more unjust than that anyone should inherit the quarrels of his father. Whenever we are loth to pardon anyone, let us think whether it would be to our advantage that all men should be inexorable. He who refuses to pardon has often begged it for himself. He has often groveled at the feet of those whom he spurns from his own.

We can gain no more glory than by turning anger into friendship. The Roman people has no more faithful allies than those who have been its most unyielding enemies. The empire would not be today where it is, had not a wise foresight united the conquered and the conquerors. If anyone is angry with you, meet his anger by returning benefits for it. A quarrel which is only taken up on one side falls to the ground. It takes two men to fight. But suppose that there is an angry struggle on both sides. Even then, he is the better man who first gives way, the winner is the real loser. He struck you, well then, do you fall back. If you strike him in turn you will give him both an opportunity and an excuse for striking you again. You will not be able to withdraw yourself from the struggle when you please.
=== on_anger_book2_ch35_en.txt ===
[Chapter 35]

No one wishes to strike his enemy so hard as to leave his own hand in the wound, and not to be able to recover his balance after the blow. Yet such a weapon is anger. It is scarcely possible to draw it back. We are careful to choose for ourselves light weapons, handy and manageable swords. We should equally avoid these clumsy, unwieldy, and never-to-be-recalled impulses of the mind. The only swiftness of which men approve is that which, when bidden, checks itself and proceeds no further, and which can be guided, and reduced from a run to a walk. We know that the sinews are diseased when they move against our will. A man must be either aged or weakly who runs when he wants to walk. Let us think that those are the most powerful and the soundest operations of our minds, which act under our own control, not at their own caprice.

Nothing, however, will be of so much service as to consider, first, the hideousness, and, secondly, the danger of anger. No passion bears a more troubled aspect. It befouls the fairest face, makes fierce the expression which before was peaceful. From the angry all grace has fled. Though their clothing may be fashionable, they will trail it on the ground and take no heed of their appearance. Though their hair be smoothed down in a comely manner by nature or art, yet it will bristle up in sympathy with their mind. The veins become swollen, the breast will be shaken by quick breathing, the man's neck will be swelled as he roars forth his frantic talk. Then, too, his limbs will tremble, his hands will be restless, his whole body will sway hither and thither. One can imagine the state of his mind within him, when its appearance without is so shocking. He bears a far more dreadful countenance within his own breast, far keener pride, and much more violent rage, which will burst him unless it finds some vent.

Let us paint anger looking like those who are dripping with the blood of foemen or savage beasts, or those who are just about to slaughter them. Like those monsters of the nether world fabled by the poet to be girt with serpents and breathing flame, when they sally forth from hell, most frightful to behold, in order that they may kindle wars, stir up strife between nations, and overthrow peace. Let us paint her eyes glowing with fire, her voice hissing, roaring, grating, and making worse sounds if worse there be, while she brandishes weapons in both hands, for she cares not to protect herself. Gloomy, stained with blood, covered with scars and livid with her own blows, reeling like a maniac, wrapped in a thick cloud, dashing hither and thither, spreading desolation and panic. Loathed by everyone and by herself above all, willing, if otherwise she cannot hurt her foe, to overthrow alike earth, sea, and heaven, harmful and hateful at the same time. Or, if we are to see her, let her be such as our poets have described her—

"There with her blood-stained scourge Bellona fights. And Discord in her riven robe delights."

Or, if possible, let some even more dreadful aspect be invented for this dreadful passion.
=== on_anger_book2_ch36_en.txt ===
[Chapter 36]

Some angry people, as Sextius remarks, have been benefited by looking at the glass. They have been struck by so great an alteration in their own appearance. They have been, as it were, brought into their own presence and have not recognized themselves. Yet that reflected image in the mirror reproduced only a small part of the real hideousness of anger. Could the mind be displayed or made to appear through any substance, we should be confounded when we beheld how black and stained, how agitated, distorted, and swollen it looked. Even at present it is very ugly when seen through all the screens of blood, bones, and so forth. It would be far worse were it displayed uncovered.

You say that you do not believe that anyone was ever scared out of anger by a mirror. The reason is that when he came to the mirror to change his mind, he had changed it already. To angry men no face looks fairer than one that is fierce and savage and such as they wish to look like. We ought rather to consider how many men anger itself has injured. Some in their excessive heat have burst their veins. Some by straining their voices beyond their strength have vomited blood, or have injured their sight by too violently injecting humors into their eyes, and have fallen sick when the fit passed off. No way leads more swiftly to madness. Many have, consequently, remained always in the frenzy of anger, and, having once lost their reason, have never recovered it. Ajax was driven mad by anger, and driven to suicide by madness. Men, frantic with rage, call upon heaven to slay their children, to reduce themselves to poverty, and to ruin their houses, and yet declare that they are not either angry or insane.

Enemies to their best friends, dangerous to their nearest and dearest, regardless of the laws save where they injure, swayed by the smallest trifles, unwilling to lend their ears to the advice or the services of their friends, they do everything by main force, and are ready either to fight with their swords or to throw themselves upon them, for the greatest of all evils, and one which surpasses all vices, has gained possession of them. Other passions gain a footing in the mind by slow degrees, anger's conquest is sudden and complete, and, moreover, it makes all other passions subservient to itself. It conquers the warmest love. Men have thrust swords through the bodies of those whom they loved, and have slain those in whose arms they have lain. Avarice, that sternest and most rigid of passions, is trampled underfoot by anger, which forces it to squander its carefully collected wealth and set fire to its house and all its property in one heap. Even the ambitious man has been known to fling away the most highly valued ensigns of rank, and to refuse high office when it was offered to him. There is no passion over which anger does not bear absolute rule.
