Chapter 1: There is No One Left

When Mary Lennox was sent to Misselthwaite Manor to live with her uncle, everyone agreed she was the most unpleasant-looking child anyone had ever seen. And it was true. She had a thin face, a thin body, thin light hair, and a sour expression. Her hair was yellow, and her face was yellow. This was because she had been born in India and had always been sick in some way or another. Her father worked for the English government. He was always busy and often sick himself. Her mother was a great beauty. She only cared about going to parties and having fun with lively people. She hadn't wanted a little girl at all. So when Mary was born, her mother handed her over to an Ayah. The Ayah was told that if she wanted to please the Mem Sahib, she had to keep the child out of sight as much as possible. So when Mary was a sickly, fretful, ugly little baby, she was kept out of the way. And when she became a sickly, fretful toddler, she was kept out of the way too. Mary never really remembered seeing anyone's face clearly except for her Ayah's and the other local servants'. These servants always obeyed her and let her have her way in everything. They did this because the Mem Sahib would get angry if Mary's crying disturbed her. By the time Mary was six years old, she was as bossy and selfish as any child could be. She was a truly awful little pig. The young English governess who came to teach her to read and write disliked her so much that she quit after three months. And when other governesses tried to take her place, they always left even sooner than the first one. So, if Mary hadn't actually wanted to learn how to read books, she would never have learned her alphabet at all.

One terribly hot morning, when she was about nine years old, she woke up feeling very grumpy. She became even grumpier when she saw that the servant standing by her bed wasn't her Ayah.

"Why did you come?" she demanded of the strange woman. "I won't let you stay. Send my Ayah to me."

The woman looked scared. She stammered that the Ayah couldn't come. When Mary threw a fit, beating and kicking her, the woman looked even more terrified. She repeated that it was impossible for the Ayah to come to Missie Sahib.

Something mysterious hung in the air that morning. Nothing was happening as it usually did. Several of the local servants seemed to be missing. Those Mary did see were sneaking or rushing around, their faces pale and scared. But no one would tell her anything, and her Ayah never came. As the morning went on, she was actually left completely alone. Finally, she wandered out into the garden and started playing by herself under a tree near the veranda. She pretended she was making a flower bed. She stuck big, bright red hibiscus flowers into little piles of earth. All the while, she grew angrier and angrier, muttering to herself the things she would say and the names she would call Saidie when she returned.

"Pig! Pig! Daughter of Pigs!" she hissed. Calling a local person a pig was the worst insult of all.

She was grinding her teeth and repeating this over and over when she heard her mother come out onto the veranda with someone. Her mother was with a fair-haired young man, and they stood talking in low, strange voices. Mary knew the fair-haired young man; he looked more like a boy. She'd heard he was a very young officer who had just arrived from England. Mary stared at him, but she stared even more at her mother. She always did this whenever she got a chance to see her. The Mem Sahib—Mary called her that more often than anything else—was such a tall, slim, pretty woman. And she wore such lovely clothes. Her hair was like curly silk. She had a delicate little nose that seemed to look down on everything. And she had large, laughing eyes. All her clothes were thin and flowing, and Mary thought they were "full of lace." They looked even more full of lace this morning, but her eyes weren't laughing at all. They were wide and scared, looking up pleadingly at the fair-haired young officer's face.

"Is it really that bad? Oh, is it?" Mary heard her mother ask.

"Awfully," the young man replied, his voice trembling. "Awfully, Mrs. Lennox. You should have gone to the hills two weeks ago."

The Mem Sahib wrung her hands together.

"Oh, I know I should have!" she cried. "I only stayed for that silly dinner party. What a fool I was!"

At that very moment, a loud wailing sound erupted from the servants' quarters. Her mother clutched the young man's arm, and Mary stood shivering from head to foot. The wailing grew wilder and wilder. "What is it? What is it?" Mrs. Lennox gasped.

"Someone has died," the young officer answered. "You didn't say it had broken out among your servants."

"I didn't know!" the Mem Sahib cried. "Come with me! Come with me!" She turned and ran into the house.

After that, terrible things happened. The mystery of the morning was explained to Mary. Cholera had broken out in its deadliest form, and people were dying like flies. The Ayah had gotten sick during the night. The servants had wailed in the huts because she had just died. Before the next day, three other servants were dead, and others had run away in terror. Panic was everywhere, and people were dying in all the bungalows.

During the confusion and chaos of the second day, Mary hid in the nursery. Everyone forgot about her. Nobody thought of her, nobody wanted her, and strange things happened that she knew nothing about. Mary cried and slept by turns for hours. She only knew that people were sick and that she heard mysterious, frightening sounds. Once, she crept into the dining room and found it empty. A partly finished meal was on the table. Chairs and plates looked as if they'd been hastily pushed back when the diners suddenly got up for some reason. Mary ate some fruit and biscuits. Feeling thirsty, she drank a glass of wine that was almost full. It was sweet, and she didn't know how strong it was. Very soon, it made her intensely drowsy. She went back to her nursery and shut herself in again. She was frightened by the cries she heard from the huts and the sound of hurrying feet. The wine made her so sleepy that she could barely keep her eyes open. She lay down on her bed and knew nothing more for a long time.

Many things happened during the hours she slept so heavily. But she wasn't disturbed by the wails or the sound of things being carried in and out of the bungalow.

When she woke up, she lay there and stared at the wall. The house was perfectly still. She had never known it to be so quiet before. She heard no voices, no footsteps. She wondered if everyone had recovered from the cholera and if all the trouble was over. She also wondered who would take care of her now that her Ayah was dead. There would be a new Ayah, and maybe she would know some new stories. Mary had been rather tired of the old stories. She didn't cry because her nurse had died. She wasn't an affectionate child and had never cared much for anyone. The noise, the rushing around, and the wailing about the cholera had frightened her. She had been angry because no one seemed to remember she was alive. Everyone was too panicked to think of a little girl no one was fond of. When people had cholera, it seemed they remembered nothing but themselves. But if everyone had gotten well again, surely someone would remember and come look for her.

But no one came. As she lay waiting, the house seemed to grow quieter and quieter. She heard something rustling on the matting. When she looked down, she saw a little snake gliding along, watching her with eyes like jewels. She wasn't frightened. He was a harmless little thing who wouldn't hurt her, and he seemed in a hurry to get out of the room. He slipped under the door as she watched.

"How strange and quiet it is," she said. "It sounds as if there's no one in the bungalow but me and the snake."

Almost the next minute, she heard footsteps in the compound, and then on the veranda. They were men's footsteps. The men entered the bungalow and talked in low voices. No one went to meet or speak to them. They seemed to open doors and look into rooms.

"What desolation!" she heard one voice say. "That pretty, pretty woman! I suppose the child, too. I heard there was a child, though no one ever saw her."

Mary was standing in the middle of the nursery when they opened the door a few minutes later. She looked like an ugly, grumpy little thing. She was frowning because she was starting to feel hungry and disgracefully neglected. The first man who came in was a large officer she had once seen talking to her father. He looked tired and troubled. But when he saw her, he was so startled that he almost jumped back.

"Barney!" he cried out. "There's a child here! A child alone! In a place like this! Good heavens, who is she!"

"I am Mary Lennox," the little girl said, drawing herself up stiffly. She thought the man was very rude to call her father's bungalow "a place like this!" "I fell asleep when everyone had cholera, and I've only just woken up. Why doesn't anyone come?"

"It's the child no one ever saw!" exclaimed the man, turning to his companions. "She's actually been forgotten!"

"Why was I forgotten?" Mary said, stamping her foot. "Why doesn't anyone come?"

The young man named Barney looked at her very sadly. Mary even thought she saw him blink his eyes, as if trying to hold back tears.

"Poor little kid!" he said. "There's nobody left to come."

Mary found out the truth in a strange, sudden way: both her parents were gone. They had died and been taken away during the night. The few native servants who had not died also left the house as quickly as they could. Not one of them even remembered that Mary, the "Missie Sahib," was still there. That was why the place was so quiet. Truly, there was no one in the bungalow but herself and the little rustling snake.

Mary found out in a strange and sudden way. Both her father and mother were gone. They had died and been taken away during the night. The few servants who hadn't died had also left the house as fast as they could. Not one of them even remembered that "Missie Sahib" was still there.

That's why the place was so quiet. Truly, the only ones left in the bungalow were Mary and the little rustling snake.