Chapter 12: Might I Have a Bit of Earth?

Mary ran so fast that she was quite out of breath by the time she reached her room.

Her hair was messy on her forehead and her cheeks were bright pink. Her dinner was waiting on the table, and Martha was standing nearby.

“You're a bit late,” she said. “Where have you been?”

“I’ve seen Dickon!” Mary said. “I’ve seen Dickon!”

“I knew he’d come,” Martha said excitedly. “How do you like him?”

“I think—I think he’s beautiful!” Mary said in a determined voice.

Martha looked rather taken aback, but she looked pleased, too.

“Well,” she said, “he’s the best boy that was ever born, but we never thought he was handsome. His nose turns up too much.”

“I like it to turn up,” said Mary.

“And his eyes are so round,” Martha said, a bit doubtfully. “Though they are a nice color.”

“I like them round,” said Mary. “And they are exactly the color of the sky over the moor.”

Martha beamed with satisfaction.

“Mother says his eyes became that color because he's always looking up at the birds and the clouds. But he has a big mouth, doesn’t he?”

“I love his big mouth,” Mary said obstinately. “I wish mine was just like it.”

Martha chuckled delightedly.

“It would look very funny on your tiny face,” she said. “But I knew you'd like him when you saw him. How did you like the seeds and the garden tools?”

“How did you know he brought them?” Mary asked.

“Oh, I never doubted he'd bring them. He'd be sure to bring them if they were to be found in Yorkshire. He’s such a trustworthy boy.”

Mary was afraid that Martha might begin to ask difficult questions, but she didn’t. Martha was very interested in the seeds and gardening tools, and there was only one moment when Mary was frightened. This was when Martha asked where the flowers were going to be planted.

“Who did you ask about it?” she asked.

“I haven’t asked anyone yet,” Mary said, hesitating.

“Well, I wouldn’t ask the head gardener. He’s too grand, Mr. Roach is.”

“I’ve never seen him,” said Mary. “I’ve only seen the assistant gardeners and Ben Weatherstaff.”

“If I were you, I’d ask Ben Weatherstaff,” Martha advised. “He’s not half as bad as he looks, even though he's so grumpy. Mr. Craven lets him do what he likes because he was here when Mrs. Craven was alive, and he used to make her laugh. She liked him. Perhaps he’d find you a corner somewhere out of the way.”

“If it was out of the way and no one wanted it, no one could mind my having it, could they?” Mary said anxiously.

“There wouldn't be any reason not to,” Martha answered. “You wouldn’t do any harm.”

Mary ate her dinner as quickly as she could. When she got up from the table, she was about to run to her room to put on her hat again, but Martha stopped her.

“I’ve got something to tell you,” she said. “I thought I’d let you eat your dinner first. Mr. Craven came back this morning, and I think he wants to see you.”

Mary turned quite pale.

“Oh!” she said. “Why? He didn’t want to see me when I first arrived. I heard Pitcher say he didn’t.”

“Well,” Martha explained, “Mrs. Medlock says it’s because of my mother. She was walking to Thwaite village and met him. She’d never spoken to him before, but Mrs. Craven had been to our cottage two or three times. He had forgotten, but mother hadn’t, and she was brave enough to stop him. I don’t know what she said to him about you, but she said something that made him decide to see you before he goes away again tomorrow.”

“Oh!” Mary cried. “Is he going away tomorrow? I am so glad!”

“He’s going away for a long time. He might not come back until autumn or winter. He’s going to travel to foreign places. He’s always doing that.”

“Oh! I’m so glad—so glad!” Mary said thankfully.

If he did not come back until winter, or even autumn, there would be time to watch the secret garden come alive. Even if he found out about it then and took it away from her, she would have had that much at least.

“When do you think he will want to see—”

She did not finish the sentence because the door opened and Mrs. Medlock walked in. She was wearing her best black dress and cap, and her collar was fastened with a large brooch featuring a man’s face. It was a colored photograph of Mr. Medlock, who had died years ago, and she always wore it when she was dressed up. She looked nervous and excited.

“Your hair is messy,” she said quickly. “Go and brush it. Martha, help her slip on her best dress. Mr. Craven sent me to bring her to his study.”

All the color left Mary’s cheeks. Her heart began to thump, and she felt herself changing back into a stiff, plain, silent child. She did not even answer Mrs. Medlock, but turned and walked into her bedroom, followed by Martha. She said nothing while her dress was changed and her hair was brushed. Once she was tidy, she followed Mrs. Medlock down the corridors in silence. What was there for her to say? She had to go and see Mr. Craven, and he would not like her, and she would not like him. She knew what he would think of her.

She was taken to a part of the house she had not visited before. At last, Mrs. Medlock knocked at a door, and when someone said, “Come in,” they entered the room together. A man was sitting in an armchair before the fire, and Mrs. Medlock spoke to him.

“This is Miss Mary, sir,” she said.

“You can leave her here. I will ring for you when I want you to take her away,” Mr. Craven said.

After she left and closed the door, Mary could only stand waiting, a plain little thing, twisting her thin hands together. She could see that the man in the chair was not so much a hunchback as a man with high, rather crooked shoulders, and his black hair was streaked with white. He turned his head over his high shoulders and spoke to her.

“Come here!” he said.

Mary walked over to him.

He was not ugly. His face would have been handsome if it had not looked so miserable. He looked as if the sight of her worried and troubled him, and as if he did not know what in the world to do with her.

“Are you well?” he asked.

“Yes,” Mary answered.

“Do they take good care of you?”

“Yes.”

He rubbed his forehead fretfully as he looked her over.

“You are very thin,” he said.

“I am getting fatter,” Mary answered in what she knew was her stiffest tone.

What an unhappy face he had! His black eyes seemed as if they scarcely saw her, as if they were looking at something else, and he could hardly keep his attention on her.

“I forgot about you,” he said. “How could I remember? I intended to send you a governess or a nurse, or someone like that, but I forgot.”

“Please,” Mary began. “Please—” and then the lump in her throat choked her.

“What do you want to say?” he asked.

“I am—I am too big for a nurse,” Mary said. “And please—please don’t make me have a governess yet.”

He rubbed his forehead again and stared at her.

“That was what the Sowerby woman said,” he muttered absent-mindedly.

Then Mary gathered a bit of courage.

“Is she—is she Martha’s mother?” she stammered.

“Yes, I think so,” he replied.

“She knows about children,” Mary said. “She has twelve. She knows.”

He seemed to rouse himself.

“What do you want to do?”

“I want to play outdoors,” Mary answered, hoping her voice would not tremble. “I never liked playing outside in India. But it makes me hungry here, and I am getting fatter.”

He watched her.

“Mrs. Sowerby said it would do you good. Perhaps it will,” he said. “She thought you should get stronger before you have a governess.”

“It makes me feel strong when I play and the wind blows across the moor,” Mary said.

“Where do you play?” he asked next.

“Everywhere,” Mary gasped. “Martha’s mother sent me a skipping rope. I skip and run, and I look around to see if things are beginning to sprout out of the earth. I don’t do any harm.”

“Don’t look so frightened,” he said in a worried voice. “A child like you couldn't do any harm! You may do whatever you like.”

Mary put her hand to her throat because she was afraid he might see the lump of excitement she felt rising there. She took a step closer to him.

“May I?” she asked tremulously.

Her anxious little face seemed to worry him more than ever.

“Don’t look so frightened,” he exclaimed. “Of course you may. I am your guardian, though I am a poor one for any child. I cannot give you time or attention. I am too ill, miserable, and distracted, but I want you to be happy and comfortable. I don’t know anything about children, but Mrs. Medlock will make sure you have everything you need. I sent for you today because Mrs. Sowerby said I should see you. Her daughter had talked about you, and she thought you needed fresh air, freedom, and running around.”

“She knows all about children,” Mary said again, in spite of herself.

“She ought to,” Mr. Craven said. “I thought she was rather bold to stop me on the moor, but she said my wife had been kind to her.” It seemed hard for him to say his late wife’s name. “She is a respectable woman. Now that I have seen you, I think she made a lot of sense. Play outdoors as much as you like. It’s a large estate, and you may go wherever you like and amuse yourself however you like. Is there anything you want?” he asked, as if a sudden thought had struck him. “Do you want toys, books, or dolls?”

“Might I,” Mary faltered, “might I have a bit of earth?”

In her eagerness, she did not realize how strange those words sounded or that they were not the ones she had meant to say. Mr. Craven looked quite startled.

“Earth!” he repeated. “What do you mean?”

“To plant seeds in—to make things grow—to see them come alive,” Mary faltered.

He gazed at her for a moment and then passed his hand quickly over his eyes.

“Do you care about gardens that much?” he asked slowly.

“I didn’t know about them in India,” Mary said. “I was always sick and tired, and it was too hot. Sometimes I made little garden beds in the sand and stuck flowers in them. But here, it is different.”

Mr. Craven got up and began to walk slowly across the room.

“A bit of earth,” he said to himself, and Mary thought that she must have reminded him of something. When he stopped and spoke to her, his dark eyes looked almost soft and kind.

“You can have as much earth as you want,” he said. “You remind me of someone else who loved the earth and things that grow. When you find a bit of earth that you want,” he added with a slight smile, “take it, child, and make it come alive.”

“May I take it from anywhere—if no one else wants it?”

“Anywhere,” he answered. “There, you must go now. I am tired.” He rang the bell to call Mrs. Medlock. “Goodbye. I shall be away all summer.”

Mrs. Medlock arrived so quickly that Mary thought she must have been waiting in the corridor.

“Mrs. Medlock,” Mr. Craven said to her, “now that I have seen the child, I understand what Mrs. Sowerby meant. She needs to become stronger before she begins her lessons. Give her simple, healthy food. Let her run wild in the garden. Don’t supervise her too closely. She needs freedom, fresh air, and outdoor play. Mrs. Sowerby is to come and see her now and then, and Mary may sometimes visit their cottage.”

Mrs. Medlock looked pleased. She was relieved to hear that she did not have to supervise Mary too closely. She had found the girl to be a tiresome responsibility and had indeed seen as little of her as she could. In addition, she was very fond of Martha’s mother.

“Thank you, sir,” she said. “Susan Sowerby and I went to school together, and she’s as sensible and good-hearted a woman as you could find anywhere. I never had any children myself, and she’s had twelve, and there were never healthier or better-behaved kids. Miss Mary will come to no harm with them. I would always take Susan Sowerby’s advice about children myself. She’s what you might call healthy-minded, if you understand what I mean.”

“I understand,” Mr. Craven answered. “Take Miss Mary away now and send Pitcher to me.”

When Mrs. Medlock left her at the end of her own corridor, Mary flew back to her room. She found Martha waiting there. In fact, Martha had hurried back right after clearing the dinner table.

“I can have my garden!” Mary cried. “I may have it wherever I like! I am not going to have a governess for a long time! Your mother is coming to see me, and I can go to your cottage! He says a little girl like me couldn't do any harm, and I can do whatever I like—anywhere!”

“Well!” Martha said delightedly. “That was nice of him, wasn’t it?”

“Martha,” Mary said solemnly, “he is really a nice man, but his face is so sad and his forehead is all wrinkled up.”

She ran as quickly as she could to the garden. She had been away much longer than she expected, and she knew Dickon would have to set out early on his five-mile walk home. When she slipped through the door under the ivy, she saw he was not working where she had left him. The gardening tools were laid together under a tree. She ran to them, looking all around the place, but Dickon was nowhere to be seen. He had gone, and the secret garden was empty—except for the robin, who had just flown over the wall and sat on a rosebush, watching her.

“He’s gone,” she said sadly. “Oh, was he—was he only a forest fairy?”

Something white fastened to the rosebush caught her eye. It was a piece of paper—in fact, a piece of the letter she had printed for Martha to send to him. It was pinned to the bush with a long thorn, and Mary knew instantly that Dickon had left it there. There were some roughly printed letters on it and a simple drawing. At first, she couldn't tell what it was. Then she saw it was meant to be a nest with a bird sitting on it. Underneath were the printed letters, which read:

“I will come back.”
