CHAPTER 7. THE WIND

He had broken his futile lance against the windmill. The image, suggested by Monsieur de Kercadiou, stayed in his mind. He realized it was by pure luck that he had escaped without harm. But the wind itself, the whirlwind, remained. The events in Rennes, a reflection of the more serious events in Nantes, had made that wind blow in his favor.

He set out briskly, walking back towards the Place Royale. That was where most people had gathered, and where, he judged, the heart and brain of this city-wide commotion lay.

But the commotion he had left there was nothing compared to what he found on his return. Before, there had been a relative quiet. People listened to a speaker denouncing the First and Second Estates from the pedestal of Louis XV's statue. Now, the air vibrated with the angry shouts of the crowd itself. Men fought with canes and fists here and there. Intense excitement raged everywhere. The gendarmes, sent by the King's Lieutenant to restore and maintain order, were like helpless debris in that stormy human ocean.

Cries rang out: "To the Palais! To the Palais! Down with the assassins! Down with the nobles! To the Palais!"

An artisan, standing next to him in the crowd, explained the increased excitement to André-Louis.

“They’ve shot him dead,” the artisan said. “His body is lying there where it fell at the foot of the statue. And another student was killed not an hour ago, over there by the cathedral works. By God! If they can’t win one way, they’ll win another.” The man spoke with fierce conviction. “They’ll stop at nothing. If they can’t intimidate us, by God, they’ll assassinate us. They are determined to run these States of Brittany their own way. They’ll only consider their own interests.”

André-Louis left him still talking, and pushed his way through the crowd.

At the base of the statue, he found a small group of students gathered around the murdered boy's body. They were all paralyzed by fear and helplessness.

A voice said, “You here, Moreau!”

He looked around and found himself facing a slender, dark-skinned man in his early thirties. The man had a determined mouth and an assertive nose, and he looked at André-Louis disapprovingly. It was Le Chapelier, a lawyer from Rennes, and a leading member of the city's Literary Chamber. He was a powerful man, full of revolutionary ideas, and exceptionally eloquent.

“Ah, it is you, Chapelier!” André-Louis said. “Why don’t you speak to them? Why don’t you tell them what to do? Get up there, man!” He pointed to the pedestal.

Le Chapelier's dark, restless eyes scanned André-Louis's expressionless face, searching for the irony he suspected. These two men were poles apart in their political views. André-Louis was mistrusted by all his colleagues in the Literary Chamber of Rennes, but by none more thoroughly than by this strong republican. In fact, if Le Chapelier had been able to overcome the influence of the seminarian Vilmorin, André-Louis would have been excluded long ago from that gathering of Rennes's intellectual youth, whom he exasperated with his constant mockery of their ideals.

So now, Le Chapelier suspected mockery in that invitation. He suspected it even when he couldn't find any sign of it on André-Louis's face. He had learned from experience that André-Louis's face rarely revealed his true thoughts.

He said, “Our ideas on that matter can hardly be the same.”

“Can there be two opinions?” André-Louis asked.

“There are usually two opinions whenever you and I are together, Moreau,” Le Chapelier said. “And even more so now that you’re a nobleman’s appointed delegate. You see what your friends have done. No doubt you approve their methods.” He was coldly hostile.

André-Louis looked at him without surprise. Since they were always at odds in academic debates, how could Le Chapelier guess André-Louis's current intentions?

He said, “If you won’t tell them what is to be done, I will.”

“For God’s sake!” Le Chapelier exclaimed. “If you want to get shot by the other side, I won’t stop you. It may help to settle the score.”

No sooner had he spoken than he regretted the words. As if in response to that challenge, André-Louis leapt onto the pedestal. Alarmed now, Le Chapelier could only assume André-Louis intended to speak for the privileged class, whose representative he publicly was. He grabbed André-Louis by the leg to pull him back down.

“No, you don’t!” he shouted. “Come down, you fool. Do you think we will let you ruin everything by your fooling around? Come down!”

André-Louis held his position by grabbing one of the bronze horse's legs. He projected his voice like a bugle call over the heads of the agitated crowd.

“Citizens of Rennes, our homeland is in danger!”

The effect was immediate and powerful. A ripple of movement spread across the sea of upturned faces, followed by complete silence.

In that great silence, they looked at this slim young man. He was hatless, with long wisps of black hair fluttering in the breeze. His neckcloth was disheveled, his face pale, and his eyes burned.

André-Louis felt a sudden rush of exhilaration. He instinctively knew he had captured the crowd's attention with a single move, holding them spellbound by his shout and his boldness.

Even Le Chapelier, still clinging to his ankle, had stopped pulling. The reformer, though still convinced of André-Louis's intentions, was momentarily bewildered by the opening words of his appeal.

Then, slowly and powerfully, in a voice that carried clearly across the entire square, the young lawyer from Gavrillac began to speak.

“Shuddering in horror at the vile act committed here, my voice demands to be heard by you,” he said. “You have witnessed murder with your own eyes: the murder of someone who nobly, selflessly, spoke out against the injustices that oppress us all. Fearing that voice, shunning the truth like evil things shun the light, our oppressors sent their agents to silence him forever.”

Le Chapelier finally let go of André-Louis’s ankle, staring up at him in sheer amazement. It seemed the man was serious for once, and for once, he was on the right side. What had gotten into him?

“What else can you expect from assassins but assassination? I have a story to tell. It will show you that what you’ve witnessed here today is nothing new. It will reveal the forces you’re up against. Yesterday…”

Then came an interruption. A voice in the crowd, perhaps twenty paces away, shouted:

“Yet another of them!”

Immediately after the shout, a pistol shot rang out. A bullet flattened itself against the bronze figure right behind André-Louis.

Instantly, the crowd erupted in turmoil, most intensely around the spot where the shot had been fired. The assailant belonged to a large group of the opposition. This group immediately found itself surrounded on all sides, struggling to defend him.

From the foot of the plinth, the students’ voices echoed Le Chapelier, urging André-Louis to seek shelter.

“Come down! Come down at once! They’ll murder you just like they murdered La Rivière.”

“Let them!” He spread his arms wide in a supremely theatrical gesture and laughed. “I stand here at their mercy. If they wish, let them add my blood to the blood that will soon rise up and choke them. Let them assassinate me. It’s a trade they understand. But until they do, they won’t stop me from speaking to you, from telling you what to expect from them.” He laughed again, not just in triumph, as those watching from below supposed, but also in amusement. His amusement came from two sources. First, he realized how easily he spoke the words needed to stir a crowd’s emotions. Second, he remembered how the cunning Cardinal de Retz used to hire men to shoot at his carriage, just to gain public sympathy. André-Louis was in a similar situation to that master politician. He hadn’t hired the man to fire that pistol shot, it was true. But he was grateful to him nonetheless, and ready to gain the fullest advantage from the act.

The group trying to protect the assailant continued battling, trying to force a path out of the angry, surging crowd.

“Let them go!” André-Louis called down. “What does one assassin more or less matter? Let them go, and listen to me, my countrymen!”

Soon, when some order was restored, he began his story. He spoke in simple language now, but with a vehemence and directness that made every point hit home. He tore at their hearts with the story of yesterday’s events at Gavrillac. He brought tears to their eyes with the tragic image of the grieving widow Mabey and her three starving, destitute children—orphaned to avenge the death of a pheasant. He also spoke of the grieving mother of Monsieur de Vilmorin, a student from Rennes, known to many there, who had died in a noble effort to champion the cause of a hungry member of their suffering class.

“The Marquis de La Tour d’Azyr said he had too dangerous a gift for eloquence. He killed him to silence his brave voice. But he failed in his goal. For I, poor Philippe de Vilmorin’s friend, have taken up his mission, and I speak to you today with his voice.”

That statement finally helped Le Chapelier understand, at least in part, this bewildering change in André-Louis. It showed why André-Louis was now disloyal to the side that employed him.

“I am not here,” André-Louis continued, “merely to demand vengeance from you for Philippe de Vilmorin’s murderers. I am here to tell you the things he would have told you today if he had lived.”

At least he was frank about that. But he didn’t add that these were things he didn’t believe himself. He considered them the hypocrisy by which an ambitious bourgeoisie—speaking through the lawyers, who were its vocal representatives—sought to overthrow the current system for its own benefit. He left his audience believing that the views he expressed were his own.

Then, in a terrible voice, with an eloquence that even amazed himself, he denounced the inaction of royal justice when the powerful were the offenders. He spoke with bitter sarcasm about their King’s Lieutenant, Monsieur de Lesdiguieres.

“Do you wonder,” he asked them, “that Monsieur de Lesdiguieres administers the law so it’s always favorable to our great nobles? Would it be just, would it be reasonable for him to administer it any other way?” He paused dramatically, letting his sarcasm sink in. This reawakened Le Chapelier’s doubts and checked his growing belief in André-Louis’s sincerity. Where was he going with this now?

Le Chapelier wasn’t left in doubt for long. André-Louis continued, speaking as he imagined Philippe de Vilmorin would have spoken. He had argued with Philippe so often, and attended the Literary Chamber’s discussions so frequently, that he had all the reformers’ passionate arguments—which were still true in substance—at his fingertips.

“Consider, after all, the makeup of our France. A million of its inhabitants belong to the privileged classes. They make up France. They *are* France. Surely you can’t imagine the rest matter at all. We can’t pretend that twenty-four million souls are of any importance, that they can represent this great nation, or that they exist for any purpose other than serving the million chosen ones.”

Bitter laughter shook the crowd now, just as he intended. “Seeing their privileges in danger of being overrun by these twenty-four million people—mostly commoners, or *canailles*; possibly created by God, it’s true, but clearly created to be the slaves of Privilege—does it surprise you that royal justice is placed in the firm hands of these Lesdiguieres, men without brains to think or hearts to be touched? Consider what must be defended against the attack of us others—the commoners. Consider a few of these feudal rights that are in danger of being swept away if the Privileged were to yield even to their sovereign’s commands and admit the Third Estate to an equal vote with themselves.”

“What would become of the right of *terrage* on the land, of *parciere* on the fruit trees, of *carpot* on the vines? What about the *corvées*, by which they command forced labor? What about the *ban de vendage*, which gives them the first harvest, and the *banvin*, which lets them control wine sales for their own profit? What about their right to squeeze the last *liard* of taxation out of the people to maintain their own lavish estates? What about the *cens* and the *lods-et-ventes*, which absorb a fifth of the land’s value? What about the *blairée*, which must be paid before herds can feed on communal lands? What about the *pulverage*, to compensate them for the dust raised on their roads by market-bound herds? What about the *sextelage* on everything sold in public markets, the *étalonnage*, and all the rest? What about their rights over men and animals for field labor, over ferries on rivers and bridges over streams, over sinking wells, over rabbit warrens, over dovecots, and over fire, which last gives them a tax on every peasant hearth? What about their exclusive rights to fish and hunt, where violating those rights is almost a capital offense?”

“And what about other rights, unspeakable and abominable, over the lives and bodies of their people? These rights, though rarely exercised, have never been canceled. To this day, if a noble returning from the hunt were to kill two of his serfs to bathe and refresh his feet in their blood, he could still claim, as a sufficient defense, that it was his absolute feudal right to do so.”

“These million Privileged ride roughshod over the souls and bodies of twenty-four million contemptible commoners, or *canailles*, who exist only for their pleasure. Woe to anyone who so much as raises a voice in protest, in the name of humanity, against these already excessive abuses. I’ve told you about one person mercilessly killed in cold blood for doing no more than that. Your own eyes have witnessed the assassination of another here on this plinth, and yet another over there by the cathedral works, and the attempt on my own life.”

“Between them and the justice they deserve in such cases stand these Lesdiguieres, these King’s Lieutenants. They are not instruments of justice, but walls built to protect Privilege and Abuse whenever it exceeds its grotesquely excessive rights.”

“Do you wonder that they won’t yield an inch? That they will resist the election of a Third Estate with the voting power to sweep all these privileges away? To compel the Privileged to submit to true equality under the law, just like the lowest commoner they trample underfoot? To ensure that the money needed to save this state from the bankruptcy they’ve almost caused will be raised by taxes, paid by themselves in the same proportion as by others?”

“Rather than yield to so much, they prefer to resist even the royal command.”

A phrase Vilmorin used yesterday came to him, a phrase he had refused to consider important at the time. He used it now. “In doing this, they are striking at the very foundations of the throne. These fools don’t realize that if that throne falls, it’s they, standing closest to it, who will be crushed.”

A terrific roar greeted that statement. Tense and trembling with the excitement flowing through him and out into that vast audience, he stood for a moment, smiling ironically. Then he waved them into silence. Their ready obedience showed him how completely he commanded them. For in the voice with which he spoke, each person now recognized their own voice, finally giving expression to the thoughts that had been vaguely stirring in each simple mind for months and years.

Soon, he resumed, speaking more quietly, his ironic smile becoming more pronounced.

"When I said goodbye to Monsieur de Lesdiguieres, I gave him a warning from a page of natural history. I told him that when wolves, roaming alone through the jungle, grew tired of being hunted by the tiger, they would band together into packs and hunt the tiger in return. Monsieur de Lesdiguieres contemptuously replied that he did not understand me. But your minds are sharper than his. You understand me, I think? Don't you?"

Again, a great roar, now mixed with some approving laughter, was his answer. He had worked them into a state of dangerous passion. They were ready for any violence he might urge them to commit. If he had failed with the windmill, at least he was now master of the wind.

"To the Palais!" they shouted, waving their hands, brandishing canes, and here and there, even a sword. "To the Palais! Down with Monsieur de Lesdiguieres! Death to the King's Lieutenant!"

He was indeed master of the wind. His dangerous gift of oratory had given him this mastery. Nowhere was this gift more powerful than in France, since nowhere else were men's emotions so quick to respond to the appeal of eloquence. At his bidding now, the gale would sweep away the windmill against which he had flung himself in vain. But that, as he straightforwardly revealed, was not part of his intent.

"Ah, wait!" he told them. "Is this miserable instrument of a corrupt system worth the attention of your noble indignation?"

He hoped his words would be reported to Monsieur de Lesdiguieres. He thought it would be good for Monsieur de Lesdiguieres' soul to hear the undiluted truth about himself for once.

"It is the system itself you must attack and overthrow, not a mere instrument, a miserable painted lath such as this. And haste will spoil everything. Above all, my children, no violence!"

My children! If only his godfather could have heard him!

"You have already often seen the result of premature violence elsewhere in Brittany, and you have heard of it elsewhere in France. Violence on your part will call for violence on theirs. They will welcome the chance to assert their mastery with a firmer grip than before. The military will be sent for. You will be faced by the bayonets of mercenaries. Do not provoke that, I implore you. Do not give them that power. Do not afford them the pretext they would welcome to crush you down into the mud of your own blood."

Out of the silence into which they had fallen anew, the cry broke out:
"What else, then? What else?"

"I will tell you," he answered them. "The wealth and strength of Brittany lies in Nantes. It is a bourgeois city, one of the most prosperous in this realm, made so by the energy of the bourgeoisie and the toil of the people. It was in Nantes that this movement began. As a result, the King issued his order dissolving the States as they are now constituted. This is an order which those who base their power on Privilege and Abuse do not hesitate to thwart. Let Nantes be informed of the precise situation. Let nothing be done here until Nantes has given us the lead. She has the power to make her will prevail, which we in Rennes do not, as we have seen already. Let her exert that power once more. Until she does so, you must keep the peace in Rennes. Thus you shall triumph. Thus the outrages being perpetrated under your eyes shall be fully and finally avenged."

As abruptly as he had leapt upon the plinth, he now leapt down from it. He had finished. He had said everything, perhaps more than everything, that could have been said by the dead friend whose voice he spoke with. But they did not want him to extinguish himself like this. The thunder of their acclamations rose deafeningly into the air. He had played upon their emotions, each in turn, as a skillful harpist plays upon the strings of his instrument. And they were vibrant with the passions he had aroused, and the high note of hope on which he had brought his symphony to a close.

A dozen students caught him as he leapt down and swung him to their shoulders. There, he again came into view of all the acclaiming crowd.

The delicate Le Chapelier pressed alongside him with a flushed face and shining eyes.

"My lad," he said to him, "you have kindled a fire today that will sweep the face of France in a blaze of liberty." Then he issued a sharp command to the students. "To the Literary Chamber, at once. We must coordinate measures immediately. A delegate must be dispatched to Nantes forthwith to convey the message of the people of Rennes to our friends there."

The crowd fell back, opening a lane through which the students carried the hero of the hour. Waving his hands to them, he called upon them to disperse to their homes and wait there patiently for what must follow very soon.

"You have endured for centuries with a fortitude that is a pattern to the world," he flattered them. "Endure a little longer yet. The end, my friends, is well in sight at last."

They carried him out of the square and up the Rue Royale to an old house. It was one of the few old houses surviving in that city that had risen from its ashes. In an upper chamber, lit by diamond-shaped panes of yellow glass, the Literary Chamber usually held its meetings. Following him, the members of that chamber came hurrying, summoned by the messages Le Chapelier had issued during their progress.

Behind closed doors, a flushed and excited group of some fifty men hailed André-Louis. Most of them were young, ardent, and afire with the illusion of liberty. They hailed him as the strayed sheep who had returned to the fold and smothered him in congratulations and thanks.

Then they settled down to deliberate on immediate measures, while the doors below were guarded by an honor guard that had improvised itself from the masses. This was very necessary. No sooner had the Chamber assembled than the house was assailed by Monsieur de Lesdiguieres' gendarmerie. They had been dispatched in haste to arrest the firebrand who was inciting the people of Rennes to sedition. The force consisted of fifty men. Five hundred would have been too few. The mob broke their carbines, broke some of their heads, and would indeed have torn them into pieces had they not made a timely and well-advised retreat from a form of horseplay to which they were not at all accustomed.

While that was taking place in the street below, the eloquent Le Chapelier was addressing his colleagues of the Literary Chamber in the room upstairs. Here, with no bullets to fear and no one to report his words to the authorities, Le Chapelier could allow his oratory a full, unintimidated flow. His considerable oratory was as direct and brutal as the man himself was delicate and elegant.

He praised the vigor and greatness of the speech they had heard from their colleague Moreau. Above all, he praised its wisdom. Moreau's words had come as a surprise to them. Until now, they had only known him as a bitter critic of their projects for reform and regeneration. Quite lately, they had heard, not without misgivings, of his appointment as a delegate for a nobleman in the States of Brittany. But they understood the explanation for his conversion. The murder of their dear colleague Vilmorin had produced this change. In that brutal deed, Moreau had at last seen in true proportions the workings of that evil spirit which they were vowed to exorcise from France. Today, he had proven himself the stoutest apostle among them of the new faith. He had pointed out to them the only sane and useful course. The illustration he had borrowed from natural history was most apt. Above all, he urged them to pack like the wolves. To ensure this uniformity of action among the people of all Brittany, a delegate should be sent at once to Nantes, which had already proved itself the real seat of Brittany's power. It only remained to appoint that delegate, and Le Chapelier invited them to elect him.

André-Louis, on a bench near the window, now a prey to some measure of reaction, listened in bewilderment to that flood of eloquence.

As the applause died down, he heard a voice exclaim:
"I propose that we appoint our leader here, Le Chapelier, to be that delegate."

Le Chapelier reared his elegantly dressed head, which had been bowed in thought. It was clear that his countenance was pale. Nervously, he fingered a gold spy-glass.

"My friends," he said slowly, "I am deeply sensible of the honor you do me. But in accepting it, I would be usurping an honor that rightly belongs elsewhere. Who could represent us better? Who is more deserving to be our representative, to speak to our friends of Nantes with the voice of Rennes, than the champion who, once already today, has so incomparably given utterance to the voice of this great city? Confer this honor of being your spokesman where it belongs: upon André-Louis Moreau."

Rising in response to the storm of applause that greeted the proposal, André-Louis bowed and immediately yielded. "Be it so," he said simply. "It is perhaps fitting that I should carry out what I have begun, though I too am of the opinion that Le Chapelier would have been a worthier representative. I will set out tonight."

"You will set out at once, my lad," Le Chapelier informed him. He now revealed what an uncharitable mind might consider the true source of his generosity. "It is not safe for you to linger an hour in Rennes after what has happened. And you must go secretly. Let none of you allow it to be known that he has gone. I would not have you come to harm over this, André-Louis. But you must see the risks you run. If you are to be spared to help in this work of salvation for our afflicted motherland, you must use caution, move secretly, and even veil your identity. Otherwise, Monsieur de Lesdiguieres will have you laid by the heels, and it will be goodnight for you."
