[Book 1 - Chapter 1: The Republican]

He was born with a gift of laughter and a sense that the world was mad. And that was all his inheritance. His exact paternity was obscure, although the village of Gavrillac had long since cleared up the mystery surrounding it. Those simple Brittany folk were not easily deceived by a fake relationship that lacked any originality. A nobleman might announce himself as the godfather of an infant from an unknown background for no obvious reason. He then takes care of the boy's upbringing and education. Even the most unsophisticated country folk understand this situation perfectly. Therefore, the good people of Gavrillac had no illusions about the true relationship between the boy, who was named André-Louis Moreau, and Quintin de Kercadiou. Quintin de Kercadiou was the Lord of Gavrillac. He lived in the large grey house that overlooked the clustered village from a high hill.

André-Louis had learned his letters at the village school. He lived with old Rabouillet, the attorney. Rabouillet worked as the fiscal intendant and managed the affairs of Quintin de Kercadiou. André-Louis was packed off to Paris at the age of fifteen to attend the Lycée of Louis Le Grand. He went there to study the law and had now returned to practice it alongside Rabouillet. His godfather, Quintin de Kercadiou, paid for all these expenses. Kercadiou seemed to be clearly providing for the young man's future by placing him under Rabouillet's guidance once again.

André-Louis had made the most of his opportunities on his own side. You can see him at twenty-four years old, filled with enough learning to cause intellectual indigestion in an ordinary mind. He eagerly studied humanity from Thucydides to the Encyclopaedists, and from Seneca to Rousseau. This study turned his early conscious impressions of the general insanity of his own species into an unassailable conviction. I cannot find evidence that anything in his eventful life ever caused him to change that opinion later on.

In his physical appearance, he was a slight wisp of a fellow. He stood barely above middle height, and he had a lean, sharp face with a prominent nose and cheekbones. His lank, black hair reached almost down to his shoulders. His mouth was long, thin-lipped, and humorous. He was saved from being truly ugly only by the splendor of his ever-questing, luminous eyes. Those eyes were so dark they were almost black. His writings provide ample evidence of his whimsical mind and rare gift for graceful expression. Unfortunately, his writings are too scarce, but his Confessions are particularly insightful. He was barely aware of his gift for oratory yet, even though he had already achieved some fame for it in the Literary Chamber of Rennes. This was one of the many clubs popping up across the country where the intellectual youth of France gathered to discuss the new philosophies spreading through society. However, the fame he had acquired there was hardly enviable. His colleagues thought he was too mischievous, too sarcastic, and too eager to mock their grand theories for the regeneration of mankind. He protested that he merely held their theories up to the mirror of truth. He argued it was not his fault if the theories looked ridiculous when reflected there.

All he managed to achieve with this behavior was to frustrate people. He would likely have been expelled from a society that had grown to distrust him, if not for his friend, Philippe de Vilmorin. Philippe was a divinity student in Rennes and one of the most popular members of the Literary Chamber.

Philippe came to Gavrillac on a November morning. He was full of news about the political storms gathering over France. He found something in that sleepy Breton village to ignite his already fierce indignation. A peasant from Gavrillac, named Mabey, had been shot dead that morning in the woods of Meupont, across the river. He was killed by a gamekeeper working for the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr. The unfortunate peasant had been caught red-handed taking a pheasant from a snare. The gamekeeper had acted under explicit orders from his master.

M. de Vilmorin was furious about such an absolute and merciless act of tyranny. He decided to bring the matter before Quintin de Kercadiou. Mabey was a vassal of Gavrillac. Vilmorin hoped to persuade the Lord of Gavrillac to demand at least some compensation for the widow and the three orphans left behind by that brutal deed.

However, André-Louis was Philippe's dearest friend, and they were almost like brothers. Therefore, the young seminary student sought him out first. He found André-Louis eating breakfast alone in Rabouillet's long, low-ceilinged, white-paneled dining room. This was the only home André-Louis had ever known. Philippe embraced him and then loudly shared his angry denunciation of the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr.

André-Louis said, "I have heard about it already."

His friend rebuked him, "You speak as if the thing had not surprised you."

"Nothing beastly can surprise me when it is done by a beast. And La Tour d'Azyr is a beast, as the whole world knows. Mabey was a fool for stealing his pheasants. He should have stolen someone else's pheasants."

"Is that all you have to say about it?"

"What more is there to say? I have a practical mind, I hope."

"I intend to say more to your godfather, M. de Kercadiou. I will appeal to him for justice."

André-Louis raised his eyebrows. "Against the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr?"

"Why not?"

"My dear naive Philippe, one dog does not eat another dog."

"You are being unfair to your godfather. He is a humane man."

"Oh, he is as humane as you could want. But this is not a question of humanity. It is a question of game laws."

M. de Vilmorin threw his long arms up toward Heaven in disgust. He was a tall, slender young gentleman, and a year or two younger than André-Louis. He was dressed very modestly in black, fitting for a seminary student. He wore white bands at his wrists and throat, and his shoes had silver buckles. His neatly tied brown hair had no powder in it.

He exploded, "You talk like a lawyer!"

"Naturally. But do not waste your anger on me for that reason. Tell me what you want me to do."

"I want you to come with me to M. de Kercadiou. I want you to use your influence to help get justice. I suppose I am asking for too much."

"My dear Philippe, I exist only to serve you. I warn you that this is a pointless mission. But please let me finish my breakfast, and then I am at your command."

M. de Vilmorin sank into a winged armchair by the clean hearth. A large fire of pine logs burned brightly there. He waited and shared the latest news of the events in Rennes with his friend. He was young, passionate, and inspired by Utopian ideals. He passionately condemned the rebellious attitude of the privileged classes.

André-Louis was already well aware of the changing feelings within the noble class. He participated in their meetings as the representative of a nobleman, so he was not surprised by what he heard. M. de Vilmorin was frustrated that his friend seemed unwilling to share his outrage.

He cried, "Do you not see what this means? The nobles are striking at the very foundation of the throne by disobeying the King. Do they not realize that their own survival depends on the throne? If the throne falls, the people standing closest to it will be the ones crushed. Do they not see that?"

"Evidently they do not. They are simply governing classes. I have never heard of governing classes that care about anything other than their own profit."

"That is exactly our complaint. That is what we are going to change."

"You are going to abolish the governing classes? That is an interesting experiment. I believe that was the original plan of creation, and it might have succeeded if Cain had not ruined it."

M. de Vilmorin controlled his frustration and said, "What we are going to do is transfer the government into other hands."

"And you think that will actually make a difference?"

"I know it will."

"Ah! I assume that since you are now in minor religious orders, you already have the confidence of the Almighty. He must have shared His intention of changing human nature with you."

M. de Vilmorin's refined, strict face grew dark. He scolded his friend, "You are being profane, André."

"I assure you I am completely serious. To do what you are suggesting would require nothing less than divine intervention. You must change human nature, not just political systems. Can you and our bragging friends in the Literary Chamber of Rennes invent a new system of government that has never been tried before? Can any learned society in France do that? Surely not. And can they point to any past system that did not end in failure? My dear Philippe, the future can only be predicted by looking at the past. Men never change. People are always greedy, always taking things, and always vile. I am speaking about humanity as a whole."

M. de Vilmorin challenged him, "Are you pretending that it is impossible to improve the lives of the people?"

"When you say the people, you are really talking about the common populace. Will you eliminate the populace? That is the only way to improve their situation. As long as they remain the common populace, their lot in life will always be damnation."

M. de Vilmorin spoke with a mix of sadness and anger. "You are arguing for the side that employs you, of course. I suppose that is natural."

"On the contrary, I am trying to argue with complete detachment. Let us test your ideas. What kind of government do you want? I assume you want a republic based on what you have said. Well, you already have one. France is actually a republic today."

Philippe stared at him. "I think you are speaking in paradoxes. What about the King?"

"The King? The whole world knows there has not been a real king in France since Louis XIV. There is an overweight gentleman at Versailles who wears the crown, but your own news shows how little power he truly has. The nobles and the clergy hold the high positions, and they keep the people of France harnessed beneath their feet. They are the real rulers. That is why I say France is a republic. She is a republic built on the best model, which is the Roman model. The Romans had great patrician families living in luxury. They kept all the power, wealth, and valuable things for themselves. Meanwhile, the common populace was crushed, groaning, sweating, bleeding, starving, and dying in the Roman streets. That was a republic, and it was the mightiest one we have ever seen."

Philippe struggled with his impatience. "Will you at least admit that we could not possibly be governed any worse than we are now? You have basically admitted it yourself."

"That is not the main issue. The real question is whether we would be governed any better if we replaced the current ruling class with a new one. I would be the last person to lift a finger for a change without some guarantee of improvement. And what guarantees can you offer? Who is the class aiming for power? I will tell you. It is the bourgeoisie."

"What?"

"That surprises you, does it? The truth is often unsettling. You had not thought of that? Well, think about it now. Look closely at this Nantes manifesto. Who are the real authors of it?"

"I can tell you exactly who forced the city of Nantes to send it to the King. It was about ten thousand workers. They were shipwrights, weavers, laborers, and artisans of all kinds."

André-Louis replied, "They were stimulated and driven to do it by their employers, the wealthy traders and shipowners of that city. I have a habit of looking at things very closely. This is why our colleagues at the Literary Chamber strongly dislike me during debates. They only skim the surface where I dig deep. There are people standing behind those laborers and artisans of Nantes. These people are advising and urging those poor, ignorant workers to shed their blood while chasing the illusion of freedom. These hidden instigators are the sail-makers, the spinners, the ship-owners, and the slave-traders. Yes, the slave-traders! These men get rich by buying and selling human flesh in the colonies, yet they are leading a campaign for liberty here at home! Do you not see that the entire movement is driven by merchants, traders, and petty subjects? Their wealth has made them envious of the power that comes only from noble birth. The money-changers in Paris hold the national debt bonds. They see the terrible financial state of the country, and they tremble at the thought that one single man might cancel the debt through bankruptcy. To protect themselves, they are working in the shadows to overthrow the state. They want to build a new state on the ruins where they will be the masters. They are inflaming the people to accomplish this goal. We have already seen blood run like water in Dauphiny, and it is always the blood of the common populace. We may soon see the same thing happen here in Brittany. And what happens if the new ideas win in the end? What happens if the noble rule is overthrown? You will simply exchange an aristocracy for a plutocracy. Is that really worth the effort? Do you think the people will be treated any better by money-changers and slave-traders? Will men who grew rich through the ugly arts of buying and selling be kinder than the priests and nobles? Philippe, has it ever crossed your mind why the rule of the nobles is so unbearable? It is their greed. Greed is the curse of all mankind. Should you expect less greed from men who built their entire lives upon it? Oh, I readily admit that the current government is terrible, unjust, and tyrannical. Call it whatever you want. But I beg you to look to the future. You must see that the government meant to replace it could be infinitely worse."

Philippe sat in thought for a moment. Then he returned to his argument.

"You are ignoring the abuses. You are not talking about the horrible, unbearable abuses of power that we suffer under right now."

"There will always be an abuse of power wherever power exists."

"Not if holding that power depends on administering it fairly."

"The very act of holding power is power itself. We cannot dictate terms to the people who hold it."

"The people can dictate terms. The people can do it with their combined strength."

"I ask you again, do you mean the common populace when you say the people? You do. What power can the common populace possibly wield? They can run wild. They can burn and kill for a short time. But they cannot hold enduring power. Power requires qualities that the common populace simply does not possess, or else they would not be the populace in the first place. The unavoidable and tragic result of civilization is the creation of a populace. As for the rest, abuses can only be fixed by fairness. And if fairness cannot be found among the educated classes, it will not be found anywhere. M. Necker is preparing to correct abuses and limit privileges. That has already been decided. The States-General will gather for that exact purpose."

Philippe cried out, "And Heaven knows we have made a very promising start here in Brittany!"

"Pooh! That is nothing. The nobles will naturally not surrender without a fight. It is a useless and ridiculous struggle, but I suppose it is human nature to be useless and ridiculous."

M. de Vilmorin became bitterly sarcastic. "You will probably call the shooting of Mabey useless and ridiculous as well. I would fully expect to hear you defend the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr. You would probably argue that his gamekeeper was being merciful when he shot Mabey, since the alternative would have been a life sentence working in the galleys."

André-Louis finished his chocolate, set down his cup, and pushed back his chair. His breakfast was over.

"I confess I do not have your boundless charity, my dear Philippe. I am saddened by Mabey's fate. However, once I get past the initial emotional shock of the news, I cannot forget that Mabey was committing theft when he met his death."

M. de Vilmorin stood up in a surge of anger.

"That is exactly the point of view I would expect from the assistant fiscal intendant of a nobleman, and the delegate of a nobleman to the States of Brittany."

André-Louis cried out in genuine concern, "Philippe, is that fair? You are angry with me!"

Vilmorin admitted, "I am hurt. I am deeply hurt by your attitude. And I am not the only one who resents your conservative tendencies. Do you know that the Literary Chamber is seriously considering expelling you?"

André-Louis shrugged. "That neither surprises nor bothers me."

M. de Vilmorin continued passionately. "Sometimes I think you have no heart at all. With you, it is always about the letter of the law, and never about fairness. I am beginning to realize I made a mistake in coming to you, André. You are not likely to be any help to me during my meeting with M. de Kercadiou." He picked up his hat, clearly intending to leave.

André-Louis sprang up from his chair and grabbed him by the arm.

He said, "I swear this is the last time I will ever agree to discuss law or politics with you, Philippe. I care for you too much to fight over other men's business."

Philippe insisted strongly, "But I have made their business my own."

"Of course you have, and I love you for doing it. It is right for you to feel that way. You are going to be a priest, and everyone's business is a priest's business. On the other hand, I am a lawyer. As you said, I am the fiscal intendant of a nobleman. A lawyer's business is strictly the business of his client. That is the difference between us. Even so, you are not going to push me away."

"I will tell you honestly, now that I think about it, I would rather you not see M. de Kercadiou with me. Your loyalty to your client cannot possibly help my cause."

His anger had faded, but his determination remained strong, rooted in the reason he had just given.

André-Louis said, "Very well. We will do as you please. But nothing will stop me from at least walking with you as far as the chateau. I will wait for you outside while you make your appeal to M. de Kercadiou."

And so they left the house as good friends. The natural sweetness of M. de Vilmorin's character did not hold any resentment. Together, they walked up the steep main street of Gavrillac.