CHAPTER 5. THE LORD OF GAVRILLAC

For the second time that day, André-Louis set out for the chateau. He walked briskly, ignoring the curious eyes that followed him through the village. He also paid no mind to the whispers that marked his passage through the people, who were all buzzing by now about the day's events, in which he had played a part.

Benoit, the elderly body-servant, ushered him into the ground-floor room. Benoit was rather grandiloquently called the seneschal. The room was traditionally known as the library. It still contained several shelves of neglected volumes, which gave it its name. However, hunting gear—fowling-pieces, powder-horns, hunting-bags, and sheath-knives—was far more prominent than anything for study. The furniture was massive, made of richly carved oak, and clearly belonged to another age. Great, massive oak beams crossed the rather lofty, whitewashed ceiling.

The squat Seigneur de Gavrillac was restlessly pacing here when André-Louis was introduced. The Seigneur announced at once that he was already informed of what had taken place at the Breton Arm. Monsieur de Chabrillane had just left, and he admitted he was deeply grieved and deeply perplexed.

"The pity of it!" he said. "The pity of it!" He bowed his enormous head. "Such a respected young man, and so full of promise. Ah, this La Tour d'Azyr is a harsh man, and he feels very strongly about these matters. He may be right. I don't know. I have never killed a man for holding different views from mine. In fact, I have never killed a man at all. It isn't in my nature. I wouldn't sleep at night if I did. But men are made differently."

"The question, Monsieur my godfather," André-Louis said, "is what are we going to do?" He was quite calm and self-possessed, but very white.

Monsieur de Kercadiou stared at him blankly with his pale eyes.

"Why, what the devil is there to do?" he asked. "From what I'm told, Vilmorin went so far as to strike Monsieur le Marquis."

"Under the very grossest provocation," André-Louis replied.

"Which he himself provoked with his revolutionary language," Monsieur de Kercadiou countered. "The poor lad's head was full of this encyclopaedist trash. It's what comes from too much reading. I've never put much stock in books, André, and I've only ever seen trouble come from learning. It unsettles a man. It complicates his views of life, destroying the simplicity that brings peace of mind and happiness. Let this miserable affair be a warning to you, André. You yourself are too prone to these new-fashioned speculations about a different social order. You see what comes of it. A fine, respected young man, the sole support of his widowed mother too, forgets himself, his position, his duty to that mother—everything. Then he goes and gets himself killed like this. It is infernally sad. Upon my soul, it is sad." He produced a handkerchief and blew his nose with vehemence.

André-Louis felt his heart tighten. His hopes, never very optimistic, that he had placed in his godfather, began to lessen.

"Your criticisms," he said, "are all for the dead man's actions, and none for the murderer's. It doesn't seem possible that you could sympathize with such a crime."

"Crime?" Monsieur de Kercadiou shrieked. "My God, boy, you are speaking of Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr."

"I am," André-Louis affirmed, "and of the abominable murder he has committed..."

"Stop!" Monsieur de Kercadiou said very emphatically. "I cannot permit you to apply such terms to him. I cannot permit it. Monsieur le Marquis is my friend, and he is likely to be even more closely related to us very soon."

"Despite this?" André-Louis asked.

Monsieur de Kercadiou was frankly impatient.

"What does this have to do with it?" he asked. "I may deplore it. But I have no right to condemn it. It's a common way for gentlemen to settle their differences."

"You really believe that?" André-Louis pressed.

"What the devil are you implying, André?" he demanded. "Would I say something I didn't believe? You're beginning to make me angry."

"'Thou shalt not kill' is the King's law as well as God's," André-Louis stated.

"You are determined to quarrel with me, I think," Monsieur de Kercadiou said. "It was a duel..."

André-Louis interrupted him. "It is no more a duel than if it had been fought with pistols where only Monsieur le Marquis's was loaded. He invited Philippe to discuss the matter further, with the deliberate intent of forcing a quarrel upon him and killing him. Be patient with me, Monsieur my godfather. I am not telling you what I imagine, but what Monsieur le Marquis himself admitted to me."

A little swayed by the young man's earnestness, Monsieur de Kercadiou's pale eyes dropped. He turned with a shrug and strolled over to the window.

"It would take a court of honor to decide such an issue," he said. "And we have no courts of honor."

"But we have courts of justice," André-Louis countered.

With renewed irritation, the seigneur spun around to face him again. "And what court of justice, do you think, would listen to the kind of plea you seem to have in mind?"

"There is the court of the King's Lieutenant at Rennes," André-Louis replied.

"And do you think the King's Lieutenant would listen to you?" Monsieur de Kercadiou asked.

"Perhaps not to me, Monsieur. But if you were to bring the complaint..."

"I bring the complaint?" M. de Kercadiou's pale eyes widened in horror at the suggestion.

"The incident happened here on your estate."

"I bring a complaint against Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr! I think you've lost your mind. Oh, you're mad; as mad as your poor friend who met his end by meddling in things that didn't concern him. The language he used here with the Marquis about Mabey was extremely offensive. Perhaps you didn't know that. It doesn't surprise me at all that the Marquis would have wanted satisfaction."

André-Louis said, "I see," with a hopeless tone.

"You see? What the devil do you see?"

"That I'll have to depend on myself alone."

"And what the devil do you propose to do, if you don't mind telling me?"

"I'll go to Rennes and present the facts to the King's Lieutenant."

"He'll be too busy to see you." M. de Kercadiou's mind then wandered a bit, as weak minds often do. "There's enough trouble in Rennes already because of these crazy States General, which the wonderful Monsieur Necker is supposed to use to fix the kingdom's finances. As if some petty Swiss bank clerk, who is also a damned Protestant, could succeed where men like Calonne and Brienne have failed."

"Good afternoon, Monsieur my godfather," André-Louis said.

"Where are you going?" he demanded querulously.

"Home for now. To Rennes in the morning."

"Wait, boy, wait!" The squat little man rolled forward, his great ugly face showing affectionate concern. He placed one of his podgy hands on his godson's shoulder. "Now listen to me, André," he reasoned. "This is pure knight-errantry—nonsense, madness. You'll gain nothing good from it if you persist. You've read 'Don Quixote,' and what happened to him when he went tilting against windmills. That's exactly what will happen to you. Leave things as they are, my boy. I wouldn't want any harm to come to you."

André-Louis looked at him, smiling faintly.

"I swore an oath today that it would damn my soul to break."

"You mean you'll go no matter what I say?" Impetuous and inconsistent as he was, M. de Kercadiou bristled again. "Very well, then, go... Go to the devil!"

"I'll begin with the King's Lieutenant."

"And if you get into the trouble you're looking for, don't come whimpering to me for help," the seigneur stormed. He was very angry now. "Since you choose to disobey me, you can break your empty head against the windmill, and be damned to you."

André-Louis bowed with a touch of irony and reached the door.

From the threshold, he said, "If the windmill proves too formidable, I may see what can be done with the wind. Goodbye, Monsieur my godfather."

He was gone. M. de Kercadiou was alone, purple in the face, trying to understand that last cryptic remark. He was not at all happy, either about his godson or about Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr. He felt like being angry with both of them. He found these stubborn, willful men, who relentlessly followed their own impulses, very disturbing and irritating. He himself loved his comfort and being at peace with his neighbors. That seemed to him so obviously the best thing in life that he was inclined to call anyone a fool who bothered to seek other things.
