[Book 1 - Chapter 2: THE ARISTOCRAT]

CHAPTER 2. THE ARISTOCRAT

The sleepy village of Gavrillac sat in a curve of the River Meu, about a mile and a half from the main road to Rennes. It was therefore undisturbed by the world's traffic. The village spread from the foot of a shallow hill, halfway up its slope, where a squat manor crowned the top. After Gavrillac paid its tribute to the seigneur—partly in money, partly in service—its tithes to the Church, and its taxes to the King, the villagers struggled to survive on what little was left. Yet, as difficult as conditions were in Gavrillac, they weren't as bad as in many other parts of France. They were certainly not as harsh, for example, as for the wretched feudatories of the great Lord of La Tour d’Azyr. His vast estates were, at one point, separated from this small village only by the waters of the Meu.

The Chateau de Gavrillac claimed its noble appearance more from its dominant position above the village than from any inherent features of its own. Like the rest of Gavrillac, it was built of granite. Three centuries of existence had mellowed its appearance. It was a squat, flat-fronted building with two stories. Each story had four windows with external wooden shutters. At either end, it was flanked by two square towers or pavilions, topped with extinguisher roofs. It stood well back in a garden, which was bare now but very pleasant in summer. Immediately in front was a fine, sweeping balustraded terrace. The chateau looked exactly what it was, and always had been: the home of unpretentious people who cared more for farming than for adventure.

Quintin de Kercadiou, Lord of Gavrillac, bore the vague title of Seigneur de Gavrillac, just as his ancestors had before him. No one knew where or how this title originated. He certainly confirmed the impression his house conveyed. He was as unrefined as the granite itself. He had never sought experience at court, nor had he even served in the King's armies. He left it to his younger brother, Etienne, to represent the family in those high-ranking circles. From his earliest years, his own interests had centered on his woods and pastures. He hunted and cultivated his land. On the surface, he seemed little different from any of his rustic tenant farmers. He maintained no grand lifestyle, or at least none befitting his position or the tastes of his niece, Aline de Kercadiou. Aline had spent about two years in the court atmosphere of Versailles, under the protection of her uncle Etienne. She had very different ideas from her uncle Quintin about what was appropriate for seigneurial dignity. This only child of a third Kercadiou had been left an orphan at the early age of four. Ever since then, she had exercised a tyrannical rule over the Lord of Gavrillac, who had been both father and mother to her. Yet, she had never succeeded in breaking his stubbornness on that particular matter. She did not yet despair, as persistence was a dominant trait in her character. She had been diligently and fruitlessly at work since her return from the great world of Versailles some three months ago.

She was walking on the terrace when André-Louis and Monsieur de Vilmorin arrived. Her slender body was wrapped in a white pelisse against the chilly air. Her head was covered by a close-fitting bonnet, edged with white fur. A knot of pale-blue ribbon held it tight on the right side of her chin. On the left, a long ringlet of corn-colored hair had been allowed to escape. The keen air had reddened her exposed cheeks. It also seemed to have added sparkle to her darkest blue eyes.

André-Louis and Monsieur de Vilmorin had been known to her from childhood. The three had once been playmates. André-Louis, given his spiritual relationship with her uncle, she called her cousin. The cousinly relationship had persisted between André-Louis and Aline long after Philippe de Vilmorin had outgrown their earlier intimacy and had become Monsieur de Vilmorin to her.

She waved to them in greeting as they approached. She stood, an entrancing picture and fully conscious of it, waiting for them at the end of the terrace nearest the short avenue they were using.

She told them, with a certain feverishness in her manner, "If you've come to see my uncle, messieurs, you've come at a bad time. He is closely—oh, so very closely—occupied."

Monsieur de Vilmorin said, bowing gallantly over the hand she extended to him, "We will wait, mademoiselle. Indeed, who would rush to the uncle when one can linger a moment with the niece?"

She teased him, "Monsieur l'abbé, when you are ordained, I shall take you for my confessor. You have such a ready and sympathetic understanding."

André-Louis said, "But no curiosity. You haven't thought of that."

"I wonder what you mean, Cousin André."

Philippe laughed, "Well, you may wonder. For no one ever knows." Then, his glance strayed across the terrace and settled upon a carriage drawn up before the chateau door. It was the kind of vehicle often seen in a great city's streets, but rarely in the countryside. It was a beautifully sprung, two-horse walnut cabriolet, varnished like a sheet of glass. Little pastoral scenes were exquisitely painted on its door panels. It was built to carry two people, with a box in front for the coachman and a stand behind for the footman. This stand was empty, but the footman paced before the door. As he emerged from behind the vehicle into Monsieur de Vilmorin's line of sight, he displayed the resplendent blue-and-gold livery of the Marquis de La Tour d’Azyr.

He exclaimed, "Why! Is Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr with your uncle?"

She said, "It is, monsieur," with a world of mystery in her voice and eyes, though Monsieur de Vilmorin noticed nothing.

He bowed low, hat in hand, "Ah, pardon! Serviteur, mademoiselle." Then he turned to leave for the house.

André-Louis called after him, "Shall I come with you, Philippe?"

Monsieur de Vilmorin said, with a glance at mademoiselle, "It would be ungallant to assume you would prefer it. Nor do I think it would help. If you will wait..."

Monsieur de Vilmorin strode off. Mademoiselle paused blankly for a moment, then laughed ripplingly. "Now where is he going in such a hurry?"

"To see Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr as well as your uncle, I should say."

"But he cannot. They cannot see him. Did I not say they are very closely occupied? You don't ask me why, André." She had an arch mysteriousness about her, a latent something that might have been elation, amusement, or perhaps both. André-Louis couldn't determine it.

He said, "Since you are obviously eager to tell, why should I ask?"

"If you are caustic, I shall not tell you, even if you ask. Oh, yes, I will. It will teach you to treat me with the respect that is my due."

"I hope I shall never fail in that."

"Less than ever when you learn that I am very closely involved in Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr's visit. I am the object of this visit." She looked at him with sparkling eyes and lips parted in laughter.

"The rest, you seem to imply, is obvious. But I am a dolt, if you please, for it is not obvious to me."

"Why, stupid, he comes to ask for my hand in marriage."

André-Louis said, "Good God!" and stared at her, crestfallen.

She drew back from him a little, frowning and tilting her chin upward. "It surprises you?"

"It disgusts me," he said bluntly. "In fact, I don't believe it. You're just playing with me."

For a moment, she set aside her obvious annoyance to clear his doubts. "I am quite serious, monsieur. A formal letter arrived for my uncle this morning from Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr. It announced the visit and its purpose. I won't say it didn't surprise us a little..."

"Oh, I see," André-Louis cried with relief. "I understand. For a moment, I had almost feared..." He stopped, looked at her, and shrugged.

"Why did you stop? You almost feared that Versailles had been wasted on me. You thought I would allow myself to be courted like any village girl. That was stupid of you. I am being sought in the proper way, through my uncle."

"So, according to Versailles, is his consent all that matters?"

"What else could?"

"There's your own consent."

She laughed. "I am a dutiful niece... when it suits me."

"And will it suit you to be dutiful if your uncle accepts this monstrous proposal?"

"Monstrous!" She bristled. "And why monstrous, if you please?"

"For a score of reasons," he answered irritably.

"Give me one," she challenged him.

"He is twice your age."

"Hardly that much," she said.

"He is forty-five, at least."

"But he looks no more than thirty. He is very handsome; you'll admit that much. And you won't deny that he is very wealthy and very powerful, the greatest nobleman in Brittany. He will make me a great lady."

"God made you that, Aline."

"Come, that's better. Sometimes you can almost be polite." She moved along the terrace, and André-Louis paced beside her.

"I can be more than polite to show you why you shouldn't let this beast defile the beautiful thing that God has made."

She frowned, and her lips tightened. "You are speaking of my future husband," she reproved him.

His lips tightened too. His pale face grew paler.

"And is it so? Is it settled, then? Your uncle is to agree? You are to be sold like this, without love, into bondage to a man you don't even know. I had dreamed of better things for you, Aline."

"Better than to be Marquise de La Tour d'Azyr?"

He made a gesture of exasperation. "Are men and women nothing more than names? Do their souls count for nothing? Is there no joy in life, no happiness, so that wealth, pleasure, and empty, high-sounding titles are to be its only goals? I had set you high, so high, Aline, a thing almost unearthly. There is joy in your heart, intelligence in your mind. And, as I thought, you have the vision that pierces through appearances and deceptions to claim the core of reality for its own. Yet you will surrender all for a bit of make-believe. You will sell your soul and your body to be Marquise de La Tour d'Azyr."

"You are indelicate," she said. Though she frowned, her eyes laughed. "And you jump to conclusions. My uncle will only consent to allow my consent to be sought. We understand each other, my uncle and I. I am not to be bartered like a turnip."

He stood still to face her. His eyes glowed, and a flush crept into his pale cheeks.

"You have been torturing me just to amuse yourself!" he cried. "Ah, well, I forgive you out of my relief."

"Again, you are going too fast, Cousin André. I have permitted my uncle to agree that Monsieur le Marquis shall court me. I like the gentleman's appearance. I am flattered by his preference, considering his high standing. It is a high standing that I may find desirable to share. Monsieur le Marquis does not look like a dullard. It should be interesting to be wooed by him. It may be even more interesting to marry him. And I think, when all is considered, that I shall probably, very probably, decide to do so."

He looked at her. He looked at the sweet, challenging loveliness of that childlike face, so tightly framed in the oval of white fur. All the life seemed to drain from his own face.

"God help you, Aline!" he groaned.

She stamped her foot. He was really very exasperating. And, she thought, a little presumptuous too.

“You are insolent, monsieur.”

“It is never insolent to pray, Aline. And I did no more than pray, as I shall continue to do. You’ll need my prayers, I think.”

“You are insufferable!” She was growing angry. He saw it in her deepening frown and flushed cheeks.

“That is because I suffer. Oh, Aline, little cousin, think carefully about what you’re doing. Think carefully about the real things you’ll be trading for these deceptions. You’ll never know those realities, because these cursed illusions will block your path to them. When Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr comes to woo you, study him well. Trust your good instincts. Let your noble nature freely judge this man based on your gut feeling. Consider that…”

“I consider, monsieur, that you take advantage of the kindness I have always shown you. You misuse the tolerance I’ve shown you. Who are you? What are you, to have the insolence to speak to me like this?”

He bowed, instantly returning to his cold, detached self. He resumed his usual mocking tone.

“My congratulations, mademoiselle, on how quickly you’re adapting to the great role you are to play.”

“You adapt yourself also, monsieur,” she retorted angrily, and turned her shoulder to him.

“To be as the dust beneath the haughty feet of Madame la Marquise. I hope I shall know my place in future.”

The phrase stopped her. She turned to him again, and he noticed her eyes were suspiciously bright. In an instant, his mockery vanished, replaced by regret.

“Lord, what a beast I am, Aline!” he cried, as he advanced. “Forgive me if you can.”

She had almost turned to ask him for forgiveness. But his regret made it unnecessary.

“I’ll try,” she said, “provided that you promise not to offend again.”

“But I shall,” he said. “I am like that. I will fight to save you, from yourself if need be, whether you forgive me or not.”

They were standing so, confronting each other a little breathlessly, a little defiantly, when the others came out from the porch.

First came the Marquis of La Tour d’Azyr, Count of Solz, Knight of the Orders of the Holy Ghost and Saint Louis, and Brigadier in the armies of the King. He was a tall, graceful man. His posture was upright and soldierly, and his head was held disdainfully high. He was magnificently dressed in a full-skirted mulberry velvet coat, trimmed with gold lace. His velvet waistcoat was a golden apricot color. His breeches and stockings were black silk. His lacquered, red-heeled shoes had diamond buckles. His powdered hair was tied back with a wide ribbon of watered silk. He carried a small three-cornered hat under his arm, and a slender, gold-hilted dress sword hung at his side.

Observing him now with complete objectivity, André-Louis saw his magnificent appearance, his elegant movements, and his grand manner. It was an extraordinary blend of disdain and graciousness. André-Louis felt a pang of fear for Aline. Here was an experienced, irresistible charmer. His conquests were legendary. He had been the despair of mothers with marriageable daughters, and the ruin of husbands with attractive wives.

He was immediately followed by Monsieur de Kercadiou, in stark contrast. The Lord of Gavrillac had very short legs. At forty-five, his body was starting to get stout, and his enormous head contained not much intelligence. His face was pink and blotchy, heavily scarred by smallpox, which had nearly killed him in his youth. In dress, he was careless, almost untidy. This, and the fact that he had never married—ignoring a gentleman's primary duty to produce an heir—was why the countryside considered him a misogynist.

After Monsieur de Kercadiou came Monsieur de Vilmorin, very pale and composed, with tight lips and a clouded brow.

To meet them, a very elegant young gentleman got out of the carriage. This was the Chevalier de Chabrillane, Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr’s cousin. While waiting for his return, he had watched André-Louis and mademoiselle walking around with considerable interest, his own presence unnoticed.

Perceiving Aline, Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr separated himself from the others, and striding quickly, came straight across the terrace to her.

To André-Louis, the Marquis nodded with his usual mix of courtliness and condescension. Socially, the young lawyer was in an odd position. Because of his supposed birth, he was neither noble nor common, but somewhere in between the two classes. Neither class fully claimed him, yet both treated him informally. He returned Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr’s greeting coldly. Then he discreetly moved away to join his friend.

The Marquis took the hand that mademoiselle extended to him, and bowing over it, raised it to his lips.

He said, looking into the blue depths of her eyes, which met his gaze with a serene smile, "Mademoiselle, your uncle does me the honor of allowing me to pay my respects to you. Mademoiselle, will you do me the honor of receiving me tomorrow? I will have something very important to tell you."

“Of importance, Monsieur le Marquis? You almost scare me.” But there was no fear on her serene face, framed by her furred hood. She hadn't learned the art of polite pretense at Versailles for nothing.

“That,” he said, “is far from my intention.”

“But of importance to yourself, monsieur, or to me?”

“To us both, I hope,” he answered her, with a world of meaning in his fine, ardent eyes.

“You pique my curiosity, monsieur. And, of course, I am a dutiful niece. So, I will be honored to receive you.”

"No, mademoiselle, I am not honored; you will be conferring the honor. So, tomorrow at this time, I will have the pleasure of calling on you."

He bowed again and brought her fingers to his lips, while she curtsied. With just that formal exchange, they parted.

She felt a little breathless now, a little dazzled by the man's beauty, his princely demeanor, and the powerful confidence he seemed to radiate. Almost without thinking, she compared him to his critic, the lean and impudent André-Louis in his plain brown coat and steel-buckled shoes. She felt guilty of an unforgivable offense for having allowed even one word of that arrogant criticism. Tomorrow, the Marquis would come to offer her a great position, a high rank. And already, she had diminished the dignity that would come from his very intention to elevate her to such a prominent status. She would not tolerate it again. She would not be so weak and childish again as to let André-Louis make his disrespectful comments about a man who, by comparison, made André-Louis seem no better than a servant.

So, vanity and ambition argued with her conscience. To her great annoyance, her conscience refused to be fully convinced.

Meanwhile, Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr was climbing into his carriage. He had said a word of farewell to Monsieur de Kercadiou. He had also spoken to Monsieur de Vilmorin, who had bowed in silent agreement in response. The carriage rolled away, with the powdered footman in blue and gold standing very stiffly behind it. Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr bowed to mademoiselle, and she waved back.

Then Monsieur de Vilmorin put his arm through André-Louis's and said, "Come, André."

"But you'll both stay for dinner!" cried the hospitable Lord of Gavrillac. "We'll drink a certain toast," he added, winking an eye that drifted towards mademoiselle, who was approaching. He was a good soul, with no subtleties.

Monsieur de Vilmorin regretted an appointment that prevented him from having the honor of staying. He was very stiff and formal.

"And you, André?"

"Me? Oh, I share the appointment, godfather," he lied. "And I have a superstition against toasts." He had no desire to stay. He was angry with Aline for her smiling welcome of Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr and the distasteful arrangement he saw her determined to make. He was experiencing the loss of an illusion.