Chapter 8. OMNES OMNIBUS

André-Louis rode out of Rennes, embarking on a deeper adventure than he had ever imagined when he left the sleepy village of Gavrillac. He spent the night at a roadside inn. Setting out early the next morning, he reached Nantes soon after noon the following day.

During that long, lonely ride across the dull plains of Brittany, now looking their bleakest in winter, he had plenty of time to review his actions and his situation. Until now, he had taken a purely academic interest in the new philosophies of social life, and by no means a friendly one. He had exercised his wits on these new ideas, much like a fencer practices with foils, honing his eye and wrist. He never allowed himself to be fooled into thinking the issues were truly real. Suddenly, he found himself transformed into a revolutionary firebrand, committed to the most desperate kind of revolutionary action. He was the representative and delegate of a nobleman in the States of Brittany. Yet, at the same time, and quite incongruously, he was also the representative and delegate of the entire Third Estate of Rennes.

It was hard to say how much he might have deceived himself yesterday, caught up in the heat of passion and swept away by his own powerful words. But looking back now, in cold blood, he was absolutely clear about what he had done. He had no illusions. Cynically, he had presented only one side of the great question to his audience.

But if the established order in France acted as a shield for Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr, giving him complete immunity for this and any other crimes he chose to commit, then the established order had to face the consequences of its wrongdoing. He saw his clear justification in that.

So, without any misgivings, he came on his mission of sedition into the beautiful city of Nantes, whose spacious streets and splendid port made it a rival in prosperity to Bordeaux and Marseilles.

He found an inn on the Quai La Fosse, where he stabled his horse. He dined in a window alcove that looked out over the tree-bordered quay and the broad expanse of the Loire, where ships from all nations rode at anchor. The sun had broken through the clouds again, shedding its pale, wintry light over the yellow waters and the tall-masted ships.

The quays buzzed with life, as busy as those in Paris. Foreign sailors wore strange clothes and spoke in harsh, unfamiliar tongues. Stalwart fishwives carried baskets of herring on their heads. Their voluminous petticoats revealed bare legs and feet as they called out their wares shrilly, almost unintelligibly. Watermen wore woollen caps and loose trousers rolled to their knees. Peasants in goatskin coats clattered their wooden shoes on the round cobblestones. Shipwrights and laborers from the dockyards, bellows-menders, rat-catchers, water-carriers, ink-sellers, and other traveling peddlers moved about. Amidst this constantly moving working-class crowd, André-Louis saw tradesmen in plain clothes and merchants in long, fur-lined coats. Occasionally, a wealthy merchant-prince rode by in his two-horse cabriolet, his coachman cracking a whip and shouting, "Gare!" Sometimes a delicate lady was carried past in her sedan-chair, perhaps with a prim abbot from the episcopal court mincing along beside her. Now and then, an officer in scarlet rode by disdainfully. Once, he saw a nobleman's grand carriage, with escutcheoned panels and a pair of white-stockinged, powdered footmen in gorgeous liveries hanging on the back. There were Capuchin friars in brown and Benedictine monks in black, and plenty of secular priests, for God was well served in Nantes' sixteen parishes. In contrast, there were also lean-jawed, threadbare adventurers and gendarmes in blue coats and gaitered legs, sauntering guardians of the peace.

Beneath André-Louis's window, a human stream ebbed and flowed. It contained representatives of every class that made up the seventy thousand inhabitants of that wealthy, industrious city.

André-Louis asked the waiter, who served his simple meal of soup, bouilli, and a glass of vin gris, about the public mood in the city. The waiter, a staunch supporter of the privileged orders, regretfully admitted that there was an uneasy feeling. Much would depend on what happened in Rennes. If it was true that the King had dissolved the States of Brittany, then everything would be fine. The malcontents would have no excuse for further disturbances. Nantes had already seen more than enough trouble. They didn't want a repeat. All sorts of rumors were circulating. Since early morning, crowds had been besieging the doors of the Chamber of Commerce, looking for definite news. But no definite news had arrived yet. It wasn't even confirmed that His Majesty had actually dissolved the States.

It was two o'clock, the busiest hour of the day at the Bourse, when André-Louis reached the Place du Commerce. The square, dominated by the imposing classical building of the Exchange, was so crowded that he almost had to fight his way to the steps of the magnificent Ionic porch. A single word would have been enough to clear a path for him immediately. But cunning prompted him to stay silent. He wanted to burst upon that waiting crowd like a thunderclap, just as he had burst upon the mob in Rennes yesterday. He wouldn't lose any of the surprise effect of his entrance.

The grounds of that house of commerce were strictly guarded by a line of ushers armed with staves. This guard had been assembled by the merchants as quickly as it was clearly necessary. One of them now effectively blocked the young lawyer's path as he tried to go up the steps.

André-Louis announced himself in a whisper.

The usher immediately lowered his stave, and André-Louis passed, following the usher up the steps. At the top, on the chamber's threshold, he paused and stopped his guide.

André-Louis announced, "I will wait here. Bring the president to me."

"Your name, monsieur?"

André-Louis almost answered him, but then he remembered Le Chapelier's warning about the danger his mission carried, and Le Chapelier's final warning to conceal his identity.

"My name is unknown to him; it doesn't matter. I am merely the mouthpiece of a people. Go."

The usher left. In the shadow of that lofty, pillared portico, André-Louis waited, his eyes straying every now and then to survey the sea of upturned faces directly below him.

Soon the president came. Others followed, crowding into the portico, jostling each other in their eagerness to hear the news.

"You are a messenger from Rennes?"

"I am the delegate sent by the Literary Chamber of that city to inform you here in Nantes about what is happening."

"Your name?"

André-Louis paused. "Perhaps it's better if we don't mention names."

The president's eyes widened with seriousness. He was a corpulent, florid man, proud of his wealth and self-important.

He hesitated a moment. Then he said, "Come into the Chamber."

"With your permission, monsieur, I will deliver my message from here, from these steps."

"From here?" The great merchant frowned.

"My message is for the people of Nantes. From here, I can speak directly to the greatest number of Nantais from all social ranks. It is my desire, and the desire of those whom I represent, that as many people as possible should hear my message firsthand."

"Tell me, sir, is it true that the King has dissolved the States?"

André-Louis looked at him. He smiled apologetically and waved a hand towards the crowd. By now, the crowd was straining for a glimpse of this slim young man. He had brought forth the president and more than half the members of the Chamber. With that curious instinct of crowds, they already guessed he was the awaited bearer of tidings.

He said, "Summon the gentlemen of your Chamber, monsieur, and you shall hear all."

"So be it."

With a word, they came forth to crowd upon the steps. However, they left clear the topmost step and a half-moon space in the middle.

André-Louis now advanced very deliberately to the spot indicated. He took his stand there, dominating the entire assembly. He removed his hat and launched the opening bombshell of that historic address. It marked one of the great stages of France’s progress towards revolution.

"People of this great city of Nantes, I have come to summon you to arms!"

In the amazed and rather scared silence that followed, he surveyed them for a moment before resuming.

"I am a delegate of the people of Rennes. I am charged to announce to you what is taking place. I invite you, in this dreadful hour of our country's peril, to rise and march to her defense."

"Name! Your name!" a voice shouted. Instantly, others took up the cry until the multitude rang with the question.

He could not answer that excited mob as he had answered the president. It was necessary to compromise, and he did so happily. He said, "My name is Omnes Omnibus—all for all. Let that suffice you now. I am a herald, a mouthpiece, a voice; no more. I come to announce to you that the privileged orders, assembled for the States of Brittany in Rennes, resisted your will—our will—despite the King's plain hint to them. Therefore, His Majesty has dissolved the States."

There was a burst of delirious applause. Men laughed and shouted, and cries of "Vive le Roi!" rolled forth like thunder. André-Louis waited. Gradually, the unusual seriousness on his face became noticeable, raising the suspicion that there might be more to follow. Silence was gradually restored, and at last, André-Louis was able to proceed.

"You rejoice too soon. Unfortunately, the nobles, in their insolent arrogance, have chosen to ignore the royal dissolution. Despite it, they persist in sitting and conducting matters as seems good to them."

A silence of utter dismay greeted that disconcerting epilogue to the announcement, which had been so rapturously received. André-Louis continued after a moment's pause:

"These men were already rebels against the people, rebels against justice and equity, rebels against humanity itself. Now, they are also rebels against their King. They would rather make a mockery of royal authority and hold the King himself in contempt than yield an inch of their unjust privileges. For too long, these privileges have allowed them to flourish while a whole nation suffered. They are determined to prove that there is no real sovereignty in France, only the sovereignty of their own parasitic idleness."

There was a faint splutter of applause, but the majority of the audience remained silent, waiting.

"This is no new thing. It has always been the same. In the last ten years, any minister who saw the needs and perils of the State and advised the measures we now demand—the only way to stop our motherland's ever-quickening progress to the abyss—found himself cast out of office. This happened because of the influence that Privilege brought to bear against him. Monsieur Necker has already been called to the ministry twice. He was dismissed both times when his insistent calls for reform threatened the privileges of the clergy and nobility. Now, for the third time, he has been called to office, and at last, it seems we are to have States-General in spite of Privilege. But what the privileged orders can no longer prevent, they are determined to thwart. Since it is now a settled thing that these States-General are to meet, the nobles and the clergy will ensure—unless we take measures to prevent them—that they pack the Tiers État with their own creatures. They will deny it all effective representation. This way, they will convert the States-General into an instrument of their own will, perpetuating the abuses by which they live. To achieve this end, they will stop at nothing. They have flouted the King's authority, and they are silencing by assassination those who raise their voices to condemn them. Yesterday in Rennes, two young men who addressed the people, just as I am addressing you, were murdered in the streets by assassins at the instigation of the nobility. Their blood cries out for vengeance."

Beginning in a sullen mutter, the indignation that moved his hearers swelled up to express itself in a roar of anger.

"Citizens of Nantes, the motherland is in peril. Let us march to her defense. Let us proclaim to the world that we recognize that the measures to liberate the Tiers État from the slavery in which it has groaned for centuries find only obstacles. These obstacles come from those orders whose frenzied selfishness sees the tears and suffering of the unfortunate as a hateful payment they would pass on to their unborn generations. Our enemies use barbaric means to perpetuate our oppression. Realizing this, we have everything to fear from the aristocracy they would set up as a constitutional principle for governing France. Let us declare ourselves at once freed from it."

"The establishment of liberty and equality should be the aim of every citizen member of the Tiers État. To this end, we should stand indivisibly united, especially the young and vigorous. This is especially true for those who have had the good fortune to be born late enough to gather the precious fruits of this eighteenth century's philosophy."

Acclamations broke out generously now. He had caught them in the snare of his oratory. He pressed his advantage instantly.

He cried in a great voice, "Let us all swear to raise up a rampart against our enemies in the name of humanity and liberty. Let us oppose their ruthless ambition with the calm perseverance of men whose cause is just. And let us protest here and in advance against any oppressive decrees that might declare us seditious when we have only pure and just intentions. Let us make an oath upon the honor of our motherland. Should any of us be seized by an unjust tribunal, intending against us one of those acts termed political expediency—which are, in effect, merely acts of despotism—let us swear, I say, to give full expression to the strength that is in us and do what nature, courage, and despair dictate to us in self-defense."

Loud and long rolled the applause that greeted his conclusion. He observed with satisfaction, and even some inward grim amusement, that the wealthy merchants who had gathered on the steps now crowded about him. They shook his hand and acclaimed him. They were not merely participants in this delirium of enthusiasm, but its actual leaders.

It confirmed his conviction, had he needed confirmation. The philosophies upon which this new movement was based had their source in thinkers from the bourgeoisie. Similarly, the need to adapt those philosophies to the practical purposes of life was most acutely felt by those bourgeois who found themselves barred by Privilege from the expansion their wealth permitted them. If it could be said that André-Louis had that day lit the torch of the Revolution in Nantes, it could with even greater truth be said that the torch itself was supplied by the wealthy middle class.

I need not dwell at length upon the sequel. It is a matter of history how that oath, which Omnes Omnibus administered to the citizens of Nantes, formed the backbone of the formal protest they drew up and signed in their thousands. The results of that powerful protest were not long delayed. After all, it could already be said to harmonize with the expressed will of the sovereign himself. Who can say how far it may have strengthened Necker's hand? On the 27th of that same month of November, he compelled the Council to adopt the most significant and comprehensive of all those measures to which the clergy and nobility had refused their consent. On that date, the royal decree was published. It ordained that the deputies to be elected to the States-General should number at least one thousand. It also stated that the deputies of the Tiers État should be fully representative, numbering as many as the deputies of the clergy and nobility combined.
