CHAPTER 9. THE AFTERMATH

Dusk was falling the next day as André-Louis, heading home, approached Gavrillac. He knew there would soon be a huge search for the revolutionary who had called the people of Nantes to arms. So, he wanted to hide the fact that he had been in that port city as much as possible. He therefore took a wide detour, crossing the river at Bruz and then again a little above Chavagne. This way, he approached Gavrillac from the north, creating the impression that he was returning from Rennes, where everyone knew he had gone two days earlier.

About a mile from the village, in the fading light, he first saw a figure on horseback slowly riding towards him. He didn't pay much attention until they were just a few yards apart. Then he noticed the cloaked figure leaning forward, peering at him. Almost immediately, a woman's voice challenged him.

“It is you, André, at last!”

Mildly surprised, he reined in his horse. Another question came, asked impatiently and anxiously.

“Where have you been?”

“Where have I been, Cousin Aline? Oh, seeing the world.”

“I've been patrolling this road since noon today, waiting for you,” she said breathlessly, hurrying to explain. “A troop of the marechaussee from Rennes came down on Gavrillac this morning, looking for you. They searched the chateau and the village thoroughly. Finally, they found out you were supposed to return with a horse hired from the Breton arme. So, they've set up quarters at the inn to wait for you. I've been here all afternoon, on the lookout, to warn you against walking into that trap.”

“My dear Aline! To think I've caused so much concern and trouble!”

“Never mind that. It's not important.”

“On the contrary, that's the most important part of what you're telling me. The rest is unimportant.”

“Do you realize they've come to arrest you?” she asked him, growing more impatient. “You're wanted for sedition, and there's a warrant from Monsieur de Lesdiguieres.”

“Sedition?” he said, his thoughts immediately going to the business in Nantes. It was impossible they could have heard about it in Rennes and acted so quickly.

“Yes, sedition. The sedition from that wicked speech of yours in Rennes on Wednesday.”

“Oh, that!” he said. “Pooh!” His tone of relief might have told her, if she had been more attentive, that he had to fear the consequences of an even greater misdeed committed since then. “Why, that was nothing.”

“Nothing?”

“I almost suspect the real intentions of these gentlemen of the marechaussee have been misunderstood. Most probably, they've come to thank me on Monsieur de Lesdiguieres' behalf. I restrained the people when they were about to burn the Palais and him inside it.”

“After you first incited them to do it. I suppose you got cold feet. You drew back at the last moment. But you said things about Monsieur de Lesdiguieres, if you're correctly reported, that he will never forgive.”

“I see,” André-Louis said, and he fell into thought.

But Mademoiselle de Kercadiou had already done all the necessary thinking. Her alert young mind had settled everything that needed to be done.

“You must not go into Gavrillac,” she told him. “You need to get down from your horse and let me take it. I'll stable it at the chateau tonight. Then, sometime tomorrow afternoon, by which time you should be well away, I'll return it to the Breton arme.”

“Oh, but that's impossible.”

“Impossible? Why?”

“For several reasons. One is that you haven't considered what will happen to you if you do such a thing.”

“To me? Do you suppose I'm afraid of that pack of oafs sent by Monsieur Lesdiguieres? I haven't committed any sedition.”

“But it's almost as bad to give aid to someone wanted for the crime. That's the law.”

“What do I care about the law? Do you imagine the law will dare to touch me?”

“Of course, there's that. You're sheltered by one of the abuses I complained about in Rennes. I was forgetting.”

“Complain about it as much as you please, but meanwhile, profit by it. Come, André, do as I tell you. Get down from your horse.” As he still hesitated, she stretched out and caught him by the arm. Her voice was vibrant with earnestness. “André, you don't realize how serious your position is. If these people catch you, it's almost certain you'll be hanged. Don't you realize it? You must not go to Gavrillac. You must go away at once and disappear for a time until this blows over. Indeed, you must keep in hiding until my uncle can use his influence to get you a pardon.”

“That will be a long time, then,” said André-Louis. “Monsieur de Kercadiou has never cultivated friends at court.”

“There is Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr,” she reminded him, to his astonishment.

“That man!” he cried, then he laughed. “But it was mainly against him that I stirred up the anger of the people of Rennes. I should have known that not everything I said was reported to you.”

“It was. That part, among the rest, was reported.”

“Ah! And yet you are concerned about saving me? I’m the man who wants your future husband to face justice, either from the law or from the people. Or is it, perhaps, that you’ve seen his true nature revealed in the murder of poor Philippe? Have you changed your mind about becoming the Marquise de La Tour d’Azyr?”

“You often show that you lack any ability for deductive reasoning.”

“Perhaps. But not so much that I’d imagine Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr will ever lift a finger to do what you suggest.”

“And in that, as usual, you are wrong. He will certainly do so if I ask him.”

“If you ask him?” His voice was filled with sheer horror.

“Why, yes. You see, I haven’t said yet that I will be the Marquise de La Tour d’Azyr. I am still considering. It’s a position that has its advantages. One of them is that it ensures a suitor’s complete obedience.”

“So, so. I see the twisted logic of your mind. You might go so far as to say to him, ‘Refuse me this, and I will refuse to be your marquise.’ You would go that far?”

“If necessary, I might.”

“And do you not see the opposite implication? Do you not see that your hands would then be tied? That you would be lacking in honor if you refused him afterwards? And do you think I would consent to anything that could tie your hands like that? Do you think I want to see you damned, Aline?”

Her hand fell away from his arm.

“Oh, you are mad!” she exclaimed, completely out of patience.

“Possibly. But I like my madness. There’s a thrill in it unknown to your kind of sanity. With your permission, Aline, I think I will ride on to Gavrillac.”

“André, you must not! It means death for you!” In her alarm, she backed her horse and pulled it across the road to block his way.

It was almost completely night by now. But from behind the scattered clouds overhead, a crescent moon appeared to lessen the darkness.

“Come, now,” she urged him. “Be reasonable. Do as I tell you. See, there’s a carriage coming up behind you. Let’s not be found here together like this.”

He made up his mind quickly. He was not the man to be driven by false heroics about dying, and he had no desire whatsoever for the gallows Monsieur de Lesdiguieres might provide. The immediate task he had set for himself might be accomplished. He had made his voice heard, ringing out clearly, the voice that Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr imagined he had silenced. But he was very far from being done with life.

“Aline, on one condition only.”

“And that?”

“That you swear to me you will never seek Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr’s help on my behalf.”

“Since you insist, and as time is short, I consent. And now ride on with me as far as the lane. That carriage is coming up.”

The lane she referred to branched off the road some three hundred yards nearer the village and led straight up the hill to the chateau itself. In silence, they rode together towards it, and together they turned into that thickly hedged and narrow bypath. Fifty yards in, she halted him.

“Now!” she told him.

Obediently he swung down from his horse, and surrendered the reins to her.

“Aline,” he said, “I don’t have words to thank you.”

“It isn’t necessary,” she said.

“But I hope to repay you someday.”

"That's not necessary. How could I do any less than this? I don't want to hear about you being hanged, André. Neither does my uncle, even though he's very angry with you."

"I suppose he is."

"And you can hardly be surprised. You were his delegate, his representative. He depended on you, and you've changed your allegiance. He's rightly indignant. He calls you a traitor and swears he'll never speak to you again. But he doesn't want you hanged, André."

"Then we agree on that, at least. I certainly don't want it myself."

"I'll make your peace with him. And now, good-bye, André. Send me a message when you're safe."

She held out a hand that looked ghostly in the faint light. He took it and brought it to his lips.

"God bless you, Aline."

She was gone. He stood listening to the receding clopper-clop of hooves until the sound grew faint in the distance. Then, slowly, with shoulders hunched and head sunk on his chest, he retraced his steps to the main road. He was thinking about where he should go. Quite suddenly, he stopped, remembering with dismay that he was almost entirely without money. In Brittany itself, he knew of no dependable hiding place. As long as he was in Brittany, his danger would remain imminent. Yet, to leave the province, and to leave it as quickly as prudence dictated, he would need horses. How was he to get horses when he had no money beyond a single louis d’or and a few silver coins?

He was also very weary. He had had little sleep since Tuesday night, and not much even then. Much of the time had been spent in the saddle, which was exhausting for someone so unaccustomed to long rides. As worn out as he was, it was unthinkable that he should go far tonight. He might get as far as Chavagne, perhaps. But there he would have to eat and sleep. What, then, about tomorrow?

If only he had thought of it before, perhaps Aline might have been able to help him with a loan of a few louis. His first impulse now was to follow her to the chateau. But caution dismissed that idea. Before he could reach her, servants would surely see him, and word of his presence would spread.

He had no choice. He would have to tramp as far as Chavagne, find a bed there, and deal with tomorrow when it dawned. With that resolve, he turned his face in the direction he had come from. But again, he paused. Chavagne lay on the road to Rennes. Going that way would plunge him further into danger. He would head south again. At the foot of some meadows on this side of the village, there was a ferry that would take him across the river. This way, he would avoid the village. By putting the river between himself and the immediate danger, he would gain an added sense of security.

A lane, turning off the main road about a quarter of a mile before Gavrillac, led down to that ferry. About twenty minutes later, André-Louis came down this lane, his feet dragging. He avoided the ferryman's small cottage, where a window was lit, and crept in the dark down to the boat, intending to cross by himself if possible. He felt for the chain mooring the boat and ran his fingers along it to where it was fastened. To his dismay, he found a padlock there.

He stood up in the gloom and laughed silently. Of course, he should have known. The ferry was the property of Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr. It wasn't likely to be left unfastened so that poor souls could cheat him of his seigneurial dues.

Since there was no other option, he walked back to the cottage and knocked on the door. When it opened, he stood well back and to the side, out of the shaft of light that came from inside.

"Ferry!" he said laconically.

The ferryman, a burly scoundrel André-Louis knew well, turned aside to pick up a lantern. He came out as he was told. As he stepped from the small porch, he raised the lantern so its light fell on the traveler's face.

"My God!" he exclaimed.

André-Louis said, his eyes on the man's startled face, "You realize, I see, that I'm in a hurry."

The ferryman growled, "And you might well be, with the gallows waiting for you at Rennes. Since you've been foolish enough to come back to Gavrillac, you'd better leave again as quickly as you can. I won't say anything about having seen you."

"I thank you, Fresnel. Your advice matches my intention. That's why I need the boat."

"Ah, no, not that," Fresnel said with determination. "I'll keep quiet, but helping you is as much as my life is worth."

"You don't need to have seen my face. Forget that you saw it."

"I'll do that, monsieur. But that's all I will do. I can't take you across the river."

"Then give me the key to the boat, and I'll take myself across."

"That's the same thing. I can't. I'll keep quiet, but I won't help you, I dare not."

André-Louis looked for a moment into that sullen, resolute face and understood. This man, living under the shadow of La Tour d’Azyr, dared not exercise any will that might conflict with the will of his dreaded lord.

André-Louis said quietly, "Fresnel, if, as you say, the gallows claim me, the situation that has brought me to this extreme point comes from the shooting of Mabey. If Mabey hadn't been murdered, there would have been no need for me to have spoken out as I have. Mabey was your friend, I think. For his sake, will you lend me the little help I need to save my neck?"

The man kept his gaze averted, and the cloud of sullenness deepened on his face.

"I would if I dared, but I dare not." Then, quite suddenly, he became angry. It was as if he sought support in his anger. "Don't you understand that I dare not? Would you have a poor man risk his life for you? What have you or your people ever done for me that you should ask that? You are not crossing tonight in my ferry. Understand that, monsieur, and go at once. Go before I remember that it may be dangerous even to have talked to you and not give information. Go!"

He turned on his heel to re-enter his cottage, and a wave of hopelessness swept over André-Louis.

But in a second, the thought was gone. He had to force the man, and he had a way to do it. He remembered a pistol Le Chapelier had given him when he left Rennes, a gift he had almost dismissed at the time. It wasn't loaded, and he had no ammunition. But how would Fresnel know that?

He acted quickly. He pulled the pistol from his pocket with his right hand. With his left, he grabbed the ferryman by the shoulder and spun him around.

Fresnel demanded angrily, “What do you want now? Haven’t I told you that I...”

He stopped abruptly. The pistol's muzzle was less than a foot from his eyes.

“I want the boat key,” André-Louis said. “That’s all, Fresnel. You can either give it to me at once, or I’ll take it after I’ve shot you in the head. I’d regret killing you, but I won't hesitate. It’s your life against mine, Fresnel. You won’t find it strange that if one of us has to die, I prefer it to be you.”

Fresnel reached into his pocket and pulled out a key. He held it out to André-Louis, his fingers shaking more from anger than from fear.

“I’m giving in to violence,” he said, baring his teeth like a snarling dog. “But don’t think this will do you much good.”

André-Louis took the key. He kept his pistol aimed.

André-Louis said, “I think you’re threatening me. It’s not hard to understand your threat. The moment I’m gone, you’ll run to report me. You’ll send the marechaussee after me to catch me.”

“No, no!” the other man cried. He realized his danger. He heard his fate in the cold, sinister tone André-Louis used, and he grew afraid. “I swear to you, monsieur, I have no such intention.”

“I think I’d better make absolutely sure of you.”

“Oh, my God! Have mercy, monsieur!” The scoundrel was shaking with terror. “I mean you no harm. I swear to Heaven I mean you no harm. I won’t say a word. I won’t...”

“I’d rather rely on your silence than your promises,” André-Louis said. “Still, you’ll get your chance. I’m a fool, perhaps, but I don’t like to shed blood. Go into the house, Fresnel. Go on, man. I’m following you.”

In the shabby main room of the house, André-Louis stopped him again. “Get me a length of rope,” he commanded, and Fresnel quickly obeyed.

Five minutes later, Fresnel was securely tied to a chair. He was effectively silenced by a very uncomfortable gag, improvised from a block of wood and a scarf.

André-Louis turned at the doorway as he was leaving.

“Good-night, Fresnel,” he said. Fierce eyes glared silent hatred at him. “It’s unlikely your ferry will be needed again tonight. But someone is sure to come and free you quite early in the morning. Until then, endure your discomfort with whatever strength you can. Remember, you brought this entirely upon yourself with your lack of kindness. If you spend the night thinking about that, you should learn your lesson. By morning, you might even be kind enough not to know who tied you up. Good-night.”

He stepped outside and closed the door.

Unlocking the ferry and pulling himself across the swift-running waters, where faint moonlight made a silver ripple, took no more than six or seven minutes. He pushed the boat’s nose through the decaying reeds that lined the stream’s southern bank. He sprang ashore and secured the small boat. Then, missing the footpath in the dark, he set off across a wet meadow, searching for the road.
