CHAPTER 6. CLIMENE

Despite careful searching among the many surviving scripts of improvisational plays, the scenario for "Les Fourberies de Scaramouche" has not been found. This is the play that supposedly secured the Binet troupe's success. They performed it for the first time in Maure the following week. André-Louis, now known as Scaramouche to everyone in the company and the public, played the title role. He had performed well as Figaro-Scaramouche, but he outdid himself in this new play. Its script seemed much better than the first.

After Maure, they went to Pipriac, where they gave four performances. There were two performances of each play, which now formed the core of the Binet repertoire. In both plays, Scaramouche was really coming into his own, and his performances significantly improved. The two pieces now ran so smoothly that Scaramouche suggested to Binet they try their luck in a real theater. This would be in the important town of Redon, after their visit to Fougeray the following week. The idea terrified Binet at first. But as he thought about it, and with André-Louis fueling his ambition, he eventually gave in to the temptation.

André-Louis felt in those days that he had found his true calling. He was not only starting to like it, but he actually looked forward to a career as an actor and author. This career might even lead him eventually to the Comédie Française, the ultimate goal for all comedians. There were other possibilities too. He could move from writing basic scripts for improvisers to writing full dialogue plays. These would be proper plays, like those by Chenier, Eglantine, and Beaumarchais.

His dreams showed how much he had embraced this profession. It was a profession that chance and Monsieur Binet had conspired to push him into. I have no doubt he had real talent as both an author and an actor. I am convinced that if circumstances had been different, he would have secured a lasting place among French dramatists. He would have fully realized that dream of his.

Even though it was a dream, he didn't neglect the practical aspects.

He told Monsieur Binet, "You realize that I have the power to make your fortune."

He and Binet were sitting alone together in the inn's parlor at Pipriac, drinking a very good bottle of Volnay. This was the night after the fourth and final performance of "Les Fourberies" there. Business in Pipriac had been as good as in Maure and Guichen. You can tell this because they were drinking Volnay.

"I'll grant you that, my dear Scaramouche, so I can hear what comes next."

"I'm willing to use this power if the offer is good enough. You must realize that a man doesn't sell exceptional gifts like mine for fifteen livres a month."

"There is an alternative," Monsieur Binet said ominously.

"There is no alternative. Don't be a fool, Binet."

Binet sat up as if he had been poked. Members of his company did not speak to him with such direct criticism.

"Anyway, I'm giving you a gift," Scaramouche continued airily. "Use it if you like. Step outside and inform the police that they can arrest André-Louis Moreau. But that will be the end of your fine dreams of going to Redon and playing in a real theater for the first time in your life. Without me, you can't do it, and you know it. In fact, I'm not going to Redon or anywhere else. I'm not even going to Fougeray until we have a fair agreement."

"Why so much anger?" Binet complained. "And for what reason? Why do you assume I'm a greedy moneylender? When we made our little agreement, I had no idea how valuable you would become to me. How could I have known? You only had to remind me, my dear Scaramouche. I am a just man. Starting today, you will have thirty livres a month. Look, I'm doubling it right now. I am a generous man."

"But you are not ambitious. Now listen to me for a moment."

And he began to explain a plan that filled Binet with a paralyzing fear.

"After Redon, Nantes," he said. "Nantes and the Theatre Feydau."

Monsieur Binet choked on his drink. The Theatre Feydau was like a regional Comédie Française. The great Fleury had performed there for an audience as discerning as any in France. The mere thought of Redon, which Monsieur Binet had come to cherish, sometimes gave him a stomach cramp. It seemed so dangerously ambitious to him. Compared to Nantes, Redon was just a puppet show. Yet this inexperienced young man, whom he had picked up by chance three weeks ago, had blossomed from a country lawyer into an author and actor. He could talk about Nantes and the Theatre Feydau without batting an eye.

"But why not Paris and the Comédie Française?" Monsieur Binet wondered sarcastically, once he had finally caught his breath.

"That may come later," André-Louis said impudently.

"Eh? You've been drinking, my friend."

But André-Louis explained the plan that had been forming in his mind. Fougeray would be a training ground for Redon. Redon, in turn, would be a training ground for Nantes. They would stay in Redon as long as people paid well to see them. During that time, they would work hard to perfect their craft. They would add three or four talented new players to the company. He would write three or four new scripts. These scripts would be tested and perfected until the troupe had at least half a dozen reliable plays. They would spend some of their profits on better costumes and scenery. Finally, in a couple of months, if all went well, they would be ready to make their real bid for success in Nantes. It was true that companies performing at the Feydau usually needed to be distinguished. However, Nantes had not seen an improvisational troupe for a generation or more. They would be offering something new, and all of Nantes should flock to see it, provided the work was truly well done. Scaramouche promised that if he were in charge, his planned revival of the Commedia dell’ Arte, in all its glory, would surpass any expectations the Nantes public might have.

"We'll talk of Paris after Nantes," he finished in a supremely matter-of-fact tone, "just as we will definitely decide on Nantes after Redon."

His persuasiveness, which could sway a mob, completely won Monsieur Binet over. The future Scaramouche laid out was terrifying, but also intoxicating. Scaramouche delivered a crushing answer to each objection as it was raised. In the end, Binet promised to think the matter over.

André-Louis said, "Redon will point the way, and I don't doubt which way Redon will point."

Thus, the great adventure of Redon shrank in importance. Instead of being a terrifying venture on its own, it became merely a rehearsal for something greater. In his momentary excitement, Binet suggested another bottle of Volnay. Scaramouche waited until the cork was pulled before he continued.

Then, holding his glass to the light and speaking casually, he said, "The thing remains possible, as long as I am with you."

"Agreed, my dear Scaramouche, agreed. Our chance meeting was fortunate for both of us."

Scaramouche said with emphasis, "For both of us. That is exactly what I want. So I don't think you'll hand me over to the police just yet."

"As if I could ever think of such a thing! My dear Scaramouche, you're just amusing yourself. I beg you, never, never mention that little joke of mine again."

André-Louis said, "It is forgotten. Now, for the rest of my proposal. If I am to be the architect of your fortunes, if I am to build them as I've planned, then I must also, to the same extent, become the architect of my own."

"To the same extent?" M. Binet frowned.

"To the same extent. Starting today, if you please, we will manage this company's affairs properly, and we will keep account books."

M. Binet said with pride, "I am an artist. I am not a merchant."

"There is a business side to your art, and that will be handled in a businesslike way. I've thought it all out for you. You won't be bothered with details that might hinder the proper exercise of your art. All you have to do is say yes or no to my proposal."

"Ah? And the proposal?"

"It is that you make me your partner, with an equal share in your company's profits."

Pantaloon's large face grew pale. His small eyes widened as much as they could as he studied his companion's face. Then he exploded.

"You are mad, of course, to make me such a monstrous proposal."

"It has its injustices, I admit. But I've accounted for them. For instance, it wouldn't be fair if, in addition to everything I'm proposing to do for you, I also had to play Scaramouche and write your scenarios without any reward beyond the half-profit I'd get as a partner. So, before the profits are divided, I'll be paid a salary as an actor, and a small sum for each scenario I provide the company. That's something we can agree on. Similarly, you'll be paid a salary as Pantaloon. After those expenses are settled, along with all the other salaries and disbursements, the remaining amount is the profit to be divided equally between us."

As you can imagine, M. Binet wouldn't simply accept such a proposal without a fight. He started with a direct refusal to even consider it.

Scaramouche said, "In that case, my friend, we part company at once. Tomorrow, I'll bid you a reluctant farewell."

Binet began to rage. He spoke of ingratitude in emotional terms. He even allowed himself another sly reference to that little joke of his about the police, which he had promised never to mention again.

"As for that, you may do as you please. By all means, play the informer. But consider that you will just as certainly be deprived of my services, and without me, you are nothing—just as you were before I joined your company."

M. Binet didn't care what the consequences might be. Consequences be damned! He would teach this impudent young country attorney that M. Binet was not a man to be taken advantage of.

Scaramouche rose. He said, "Very well," with a mix of indifference and resignation. "As you wish. But before you act, sleep on the matter. In the cold light of morning, you may see our two proposals in their proper perspective. Mine means fortune for both of us. Yours means ruin for both of us. Good night, M. Binet. Heaven help you to a wise decision."

M. Binet's final decision was, naturally, the only one possible given André-Louis's firm resolve, as André-Louis held all the advantages. Of course, there were further discussions before everything was settled. M. Binet only agreed after an endless amount of haggling, which was surprising for an artist and not a man of business. André-Louis made one or two concessions. For instance, he agreed to waive his claim to be paid for scenarios. He also agreed that M. Binet could set his own salary, even though it was completely out of proportion to what he deserved.

So, in the end, the matter was settled, and the announcement was duly made to the assembled company. Of course, there were jealousies and resentments. But these feelings weren't deep-seated, and they were easily overcome when everyone discovered that the new arrangement would significantly improve the entire company's salaries. This was a point that M. Binet had strongly opposed. But the irresistible Scaramouche swept away all objections.

"If we are to play at the Feydau, you want a company of self-respecting comedians, not a pack of cringing starvelings. The more reasonably we pay them, the more they will earn for us."

In this way, the company's resentment of its latest recruit's too-swift promotion was overcome. Now, with one exception, they cheerfully accepted Scaramouche's dominance. This dominance would soon be so firmly established that M. Binet himself would fall under its sway.

The one exception was Climene. Her failure to control this interesting young stranger, who had almost literally appeared among them that morning outside Guichen, had created a malice in her. His persistent ignoring of her had steadily fueled this malice. She had argued with her father when the new partnership was first formed. She had lost her temper with him and called him a fool. M. Binet, in Pantaloon's best style, had then lost his temper in turn and boxed her ears. She blamed Scaramouche for all of it and looked for an opportunity to settle some of that ever-increasing score. But opportunities were few. Scaramouche was too busy at that time. During the week of preparation at Fougeray, he was rarely seen except at performances. Once they were at Redon, he moved like the wind between the theatre and the inn.

The Redon experiment proved successful from the start. Stimulated and encouraged by this, André-Louis worked day and night during the month they spent in that busy little town. The timing was perfect, as the chestnut trade, for which Redon was a hub, was then at its peak. Every afternoon, the small theatre was packed with spectators. The troupe's fame had spread, carried by the district's chestnut growers who brought their goods to Redon market. Audiences consisted of people from the surrounding countryside and from neighboring villages as far out as Allaire, Saint-Perrieux, and Saint-Nicholas. To keep business from slowing down, André-Louis prepared a new scenario every week. He wrote three in addition to the two he had already provided the company: "The Marriage of Pantaloon," "The Shy Lover," and "The Terrible Captain." Of these, the last was the greatest success. It was based on Plautus's "Miles Gloriosus," offering great opportunities for Rhodomont and a good role for Scaramouche as the roaring captain's sly lieutenant. Its success was largely due to André-Louis expanding the scenario. He indicated very fully in places the lines the dialogue should follow, and here and there, he even supplied some of the actual dialogue to be spoken, without, however, making it mandatory for the actors to stick to it precisely.

Meanwhile, as the business prospered, he became busy with tailors, improving the company's wardrobe, which desperately needed an upgrade. He tracked down a couple of struggling artists and lured them into the company to play small parts, such as apothecaries and notaries. He then had them use their free time to paint new scenery, preparing for what he called the "conquest of Nantes," which was scheduled for the new year. Never in his life had he worked so hard; in fact, he had never worked at all compared to his current activities. His energy, enthusiasm, and good humor seemed inexhaustible. He came and went, acted, wrote, conceived, directed, planned, and executed. All the while, M. Binet finally relaxed in relative wealth, drank Burgundy every night, ate white bread and other delicacies, and began to congratulate himself on his shrewdness for making this industrious, tireless fellow his partner. Having realized how groundless his fears about performing at Redon had been, he now started to dismiss the anxieties that the idea of Nantes had previously caused him.

His happiness was reflected throughout the ranks of his company, with the single exception, as always, of Climene. She had stopped sneering at Scaramouche, finally realizing that her sneers left him unaffected and only hurt herself. Her almost indefinable resentment of him grew stronger because it was stifled, until, at all costs, she had to find an outlet for it.

One day, she deliberately put herself in his path as he was leaving the theatre after the performance. The others had already left, and she had returned, pretending to have forgotten something.

She asked him directly, "Will you tell me what I have done to you?"

"Done to me, Mademoiselle?" He didn't understand.

She made an impatient gesture. "Why do you hate me?"

"Hate you, mademoiselle? I don't hate anyone. It's the most foolish of all emotions. I've never hated, not even my enemies."

"What Christian resignation!"

"As for hating you, of all people! Why... I find you adorable. I envy Leander every day of my life. I've seriously thought of having him play Scaramouche, and playing the lover myself."

"I don't think you'd be a success," she said.

"That's the only thing holding me back. And yet, with the inspiration Leander receives, it's possible I might be convincing."

"Why, what inspiration do you mean?"

"The inspiration of performing for such an adorable Climene."

Her lazy eyes now sharpened, searching his lean face.

"You're laughing at me," she said. She swept past him into the theater on her pretended quest. There was nothing to be done with such a man. He was utterly without feeling. He wasn't a man at all.

Yet when she came out again after about five minutes, she found him still lingering at the door.

"Not gone yet?" she asked him, haughtily.

"I was waiting for you, mademoiselle. You'll be walking to the inn. If I might escort you..."

"But what gallantry! What condescension!"

"Perhaps you'd prefer I didn't?"

"How could I prefer that, Monsieur Scaramouche? Besides, we're both going the same way, and the streets are open to everyone. It's just that I'm overwhelmed by the unusual honor."

He looked at her charming little face, noting how it was obscured by its cloud of dignity. He laughed.

"Perhaps I feared the honor wasn't sought."

"Ah, now I understand," she cried. "It's for me to seek these honors. I'm to woo a man before he'll pay me the homage of civility. It must be so, since you, who clearly know everything, have said so. It remains for me to beg your pardon for my ignorance."

"It amuses you to be cruel," Scaramouche said. "No matter. Shall we walk?"

They set out together, stepping briskly to warm themselves against the wintry evening air. For a while, they walked in silence, yet each furtively observed the other.

"And so, you find me cruel?" she challenged him at length. This showed that the accusation had hit home.

He looked at her with a half-smile. "Will you deny it?"

"You're the first man who ever accused me of that."

"I dare not assume I'm the first man you've been cruel to. That would be an assumption too flattering to myself. I prefer to think the others suffered in silence."

"Mon Dieu! Have you suffered?" She seemed to be caught between seriousness and teasing.

"I offer this confession on the altar of your vanity."

"I never would have suspected it."

"How could you? Am I not what your father calls a natural actor? I was an actor long before I became Scaramouche. That's why I've laughed. I often do when I'm hurt. When you chose to be disdainful, I, in turn, acted disdain."

"You acted very well," she said, without thinking.

"Of course. I'm an excellent actor."

"And why this sudden change?"

"In response to the change in you. You've grown tired of your role as the cruel madam. It's a dull part, believe me, and unworthy of your talents. If I were a woman, Climene, and had your loveliness and grace, I would scorn to use them as weapons."

"Loveliness and grace!" she echoed, pretending to be amused and surprised. But the vain girl was mollified. "When did you discover this beauty and grace, Monsieur Scaramouche?"

He looked at her for a moment, considering her lively beauty, the adorable femininity that had irresistibly attracted him from the very beginning.

"One morning when I saw you rehearsing a love scene with Leandre."

He caught the surprise that jumped into her eyes, before she hid them under drooping lids from his too-intense gaze.

"Why, that was the first time you saw me."

"I had no earlier occasion to notice your charms."

"You ask me to believe too much," she said, but her tone was softer than he had ever heard it before.

"Then you'll refuse to believe me if I confess that it was this grace and beauty that determined my destiny that day, urging me to join your father's troupe."

At that, she was a little breathless. There was no longer any thought of expressing resentment. All resentment was forgotten.

"But why? With what object?"

"With the object of asking you one day to be my wife."

She stopped, shocked by that, and swung around to face him. Her gaze met his now, without shyness. There was a harder glitter in her eyes, and a faint flush of color in her cheeks. She suspected him of unforgivable mockery.

"You go very fast, don't you?" she asked him heatedly.

"I do. Haven't you noticed? I am a man of sudden impulses. See what I have made of the Binet troupe in less than a couple of months. Someone else might have worked for a year and not achieved half of it. Should I be slower in love than in work? Would it be reasonable to expect it? I have curbed and repressed myself so as not to scare you with my haste. In doing so, I've done violence to my feelings. Even more so by using the same cold aloofness you chose to treat me with. I have waited, oh, so patiently, until you should tire of that cruel mood."

"You are an amazing man," she said, without any emotion.

"I am," he agreed with her. "Only the conviction that I am not commonplace has allowed me to hope as I have."

Mechanically, and as if by tacit consent, they resumed their walk.

"And I ask you to observe," he said, "when you complain that I go very fast, that, after all, I have asked you for nothing so far."

"How?" she asked, frowning.

"I have merely told you of my hopes. I am not so rash as to ask at once if I may realize them."

"Indeed, but that is prudent," she said, tartly.

"Of course."

It was his self-possession that exasperated her. After that, she walked the short rest of the way in silence, and so, for the moment, the matter was left at that.

But that night, after supper, it happened that when Climene was about to go to bed, he and she were alone together in the upstairs room that her father kept exclusively for his acting company. The Binet Troupe, you see, was becoming successful.

As Climene now rose to leave for the night, Scaramouche rose with her to light her candle. Holding it in her left hand, she offered him her right, a long, tapering, white hand at the end of a softly rounded arm, which was bare to the elbow.

"Good-night, Scaramouche," she said, but so softly, so tenderly, that he caught his breath and stood gazing at her, his dark eyes aglow.

For a moment, then he took the tips of her fingers in his grasp, and bowing over her hand, pressed his lips upon it. Then he looked at her again. Her intense femininity lured him, invited him, surrendered to him. Her face was pale. There was a glitter in her eyes, a curious smile upon her parted lips, and under its fichu-menteur, her bosom rose and fell, completing her surrender.

Still holding her hand, he drew her towards him. She came unresisting. He took the candle from her and set it down on the sideboard where she stood. The next moment, her slight, lithe body was in his arms, and he was kissing her, murmuring her name as if it were a prayer.

“Am I cruel now?” she asked him, panting. He kissed her again as his only answer. “You made me cruel because you would not see,” she then whispered to him.

And then the door opened, and M. Binet came in and was confronted by this highly indecorous behavior from his daughter.

He stood staring while they, quite leisurely and with an unnatural composure, separated from each other.

“And what may be the meaning of this?” M. Binet demanded, bewildered and profoundly shocked.

“Does it require explaining?” asked Scaramouche. “Doesn’t it speak for itself, eloquently? It means that Climene and I have decided to be married.”

“And doesn’t it matter what I may decide?”

“Of course. But you wouldn't have the bad taste or the bad heart to offer any obstacle.”

“You take that for granted? Yes, that’s certainly your way, to take things for granted. But my daughter is not to be taken for granted. I have very definite views for my daughter. You have done an unworthy thing, Scaramouche. You have betrayed my trust in you. I am very angry with you.”

He rolled forward with his heavy yet curiously noiseless walk. Scaramouche turned to her, smiling, and handed her the candle.

“If you will leave us, Climene, I will ask your hand of your father in proper form.”

She vanished, a little flustered, lovelier than ever in her mix of confusion and timidity. Scaramouche closed the door. He then faced the enraged M. Binet, who had flung himself into an armchair at the head of the short table. Scaramouche's stated purpose was to ask for Climene's hand in proper form. And this was how he did it:

“Father-in-law,” he said, “I congratulate you. This will certainly mean the Comedie Francaise for Climene, and that very soon. You will shine in the glory she reflects. As Madame Scaramouche’s father, you may yet become famous.”

Binet’s face slowly turned purple. He glared at Scaramouche in speechless shock. His rage was even more complete because of his humiliating conviction that this irresistible fellow would bend him to his will, no matter what he said or did. Finally, he found his voice.

“You’re a damned corsair,” he cried thickly, banging his ham-like fist on the table. “A corsair! First you sail in and rob me of half my legitimate earnings; and now you want to take my daughter away. But I’ll be damned if I’ll give her to a graceless, nameless scoundrel like you. The gallows are already waiting for you.”

Scaramouche pulled the bell-rope, completely unfazed. He smiled. There was a flush on his cheeks and a gleam in his eyes. He was very pleased with the world that night. He really owed a great debt to M. de Lesdiguieres.

“Binet,” he said, “forget for once that you are Pantaloon, and behave as a nice, amiable father-in-law should behave when he has secured a son-in-law of exceptional merits. We are going to have a bottle of Burgundy at my expense, and it will be the best bottle of Burgundy to be found in Redon. Calm yourself and give it the honor it deserves. Getting worked up always dulls the palate’s fine sensitivity.”
