[Book 2 - Chapter 2: THE SERVICE OF THESPIS]

Chapter 2. THE SERVICE OF THESPIS

As Andre-Louis sat down to breakfast with them behind the traveling house, in the bright sunshine that softened the cold breath of that November morning, he thought they were an odd yet attractive crew.

An air of joy filled the group. They acted as if they had no cares. They joked about the struggles of their wandering life. They were curiously but pleasantly artificial. They were dramatic in the way they handled everyday tasks. Their gestures were exaggerated, and their speech was stiff and theatrical. They seemed to belong to a separate world. This world of unreality only became real on the planks of their stage, under the glare of their footlights.

A strong bond of friendship connected them. Andre-Louis cynically thought that this harmony might be the cause of their apparent unreality. In the real world, greedy ambition and the constant drive to acquire things prevent the kind of friendship that was present here.

There were exactly eleven of them, three women and eight men. They addressed each other by their stage names. These names indicated their specific character types. The names never changed, or only changed slightly, no matter what play they performed.

"We are," Pantaloon informed him, "one of those few remaining loyal bands of real actors who uphold the traditions of the old Italian Commedia dell' Arte. We do not burden our memories and dull our wits with the stiff phrases produced by a wretched author's late-night writing. Each of us is effectively his own author as he develops his assigned part. We are improvisers from the old and noble Italian school."

Andre-Louis said, "I had guessed as much when I found you rehearsing your improvisations."

Pantaloon frowned.

"I have noticed, young sir, that your humor leans toward the sharp, if not the bitter. That is fine. I suppose it is the humor that matches such a face. But it may lead you astray, as it did in this case. That rehearsal was a very unusual thing for us. It was necessary because of the acting inexperience of our Leander. We are trying to train him in an art that nature forgot to give him for his current needs. If he continues to fail to live up to our teaching, there will be trouble. But we will not disturb our current harmony with the unpleasant thought of misfortunes that we still hope to avoid. We love our Leander despite all his faults. Let me introduce you to our company."

He then proceeded to introduce everyone in detail. He pointed out the tall and friendly Rhodomont, whom Andre-Louis already knew.

Pantaloon explained, "His long limbs and hooked nose were his outward qualifications to play roaring captains. His loud voice has justified our choice. You should hear him roar. At first we called him Spavento or Epouvapte. But those names were not worthy of such a great artist. Not since the superb Mondor amazed the world has such an arrogant bully been seen upon the stage. So we gave him the name of Rhodomont, which Mondor made famous. I give you my word as an actor and a gentleman, for I am or was a gentleman, that he has proven us right."

His small eyes beamed in his large, swollen face as he looked at the man he had just praised. The terrible Rhodomont was confused by so much praise. He blushed like a schoolgirl as he met Andre-Louis's serious gaze.

"Then here we have Scaramouche, whom you also already know. Sometimes he plays Scapin and sometimes Coviello. But he is mostly Scaramouche, and I must tell you he is best suited for it. Sometimes he is too well suited, I think. He is Scaramouche not only on the stage, but also in the real world. He has a talent for sly plotting and a knack for stirring up trouble between people. He combines this with a bold aggressiveness when he thinks he is safe from revenge. He is Scaramouche, the little skirmisher, in real life. I could say more. But my nature is to be charitable and loving to all mankind."

Scaramouche snarled, "Just like the priest said when he kissed the serving girl," and went back to eating.

Pantaloon said, "You will notice that his humor, like yours, is bitter." He moved on. "Then that rascal with the lumpy nose and the grinning country face is, of course, Pierrot. Could he be anything else?"

The rustic young man said, "I could play lovers much better."

Pantaloon said scornfully, "That is the delusion suited to Pierrot. This heavy, thick-browed ruffian, who has grown old in sin, and whose appetite grows with his age, is Polichinelle. As you can see, nature designed each of us for the part we play. This quick, freckled rascal is Harlequin. He is not the sparkly Harlequin that modern decay has turned him into. He is the genuine original fool of the Commedia. He is ragged and patched. He is an arrogant, cowardly, and wicked clown."

Harlequin mimicked the leader of the troupe and said, "As you can see, nature designed each of us for the part we play."

Pantaloon replied, "Only physically, my friend. Otherwise, we would not have so much trouble teaching this beautiful Leander how to be a lover. Then we have Pasquariel here. He is sometimes a pharmacist, sometimes a lawyer, and sometimes a servant. He is a friendly and helpful fellow. He is also an excellent cook because he is from Italy, which is a land of greedy eaters. Finally, you have me. As the father of the company, I play the roles of a father as Pantaloon. Sometimes I play a fooled husband or an ignorant, arrogant doctor. But I rarely need to use any name other than Pantaloon. Out of all of us, I am the only one who uses a real name. My name is Binet, sir."

"Now for the ladies. First in seniority is Madame over there." He waved one of his large hands toward a plump, smiling blonde woman of forty-five, who was sitting on the bottom step of the traveling house. "She is our chaperone, mother, or nurse, depending on the role. She is known simply and grandly as Madame. If she ever had a real name, she has forgotten it long ago, which is probably for the best. Next, we have this lively girl with the turned-up nose and wide mouth. She is, of course, our bold maid Columbine. Finally, there is my daughter Climene. She is a romantic lead with talent that cannot be matched outside the Comedie Francaise, where she unfortunately dreams of becoming a member."

The lovely Climene tossed her nut-brown curls. She really was beautiful. She laughed as she looked across at Andre-Louis. He had noticed by now that her eyes were hazel instead of blue.

Climene said, "Do not believe him, sir. I am the queen here, and I prefer to be a queen here rather than a slave in Paris."

Andre-Louis said very seriously, "Mademoiselle will be queen wherever she graciously chooses to reign."

Her only answer was a shy but attractive glance from under her fluttering eyelids. Meanwhile, her father was yelling at the handsome young man who played the lovers. He shouted, "Did you hear that, Leander? That is the kind of speech you should practice."

Leander raised his lazy eyebrows. He asked, "That?" and shrugged. "That is just a common phrase."

Andre-Louis laughed in approval. "Monsieur Leander is quicker with his wits than you admit. There is cleverness in calling it a common fact to say Mademoiselle Climene is a queen."

Some of the group laughed. Monsieur Binet was among them, laughing with friendly teasing.

Binet said, "Do you think he is clever enough to mean it that way? Bah! Any cleverness from him is purely by accident."

The conversation became open to everyone, and Andre-Louis soon learned more about this traveling band. They were on their way to Guichen. They hoped to make good money at the fair that was opening next Monday. They planned to make a grand entrance into the town at noon. They would set up their stage in the old market and give their first performance on Saturday night. The play would be based on a new outline written by Monsieur Binet, which he believed would amaze the local country folk. Then Monsieur Binet let out a sigh and turned to the older, dark-skinned, thick-browed Polichinelle sitting on his left.

Binet said, "But we will miss Felicien. I really do not know what we will do without him."

Polichinelle spoke with his mouth full, "Oh, we will manage somehow."

Binet replied, "You always say that, no matter what happens. You know that you will never be the one doing the work."

Harlequin said, "It should not be difficult to replace him."

Binet said, "That is true, if we were in a civilized place. But where among the country people of Brittany will we find a man with even his small skills?" Monsieur Binet turned to Andre-Louis. "He was our prop manager, our mechanic, our stage builder, our business manager, and he occasionally acted."

Andre-Louis said, "I assume he played the part of Figaro." This earned him a laugh.

Binet said, "So you know the work of Beaumarchais!" He looked at the young man with fresh interest.

Andre-Louis replied, "I think he is fairly well known."

Binet said, "In Paris, certainly. But I never imagined his fame had reached the wild areas of Brittany."

Andre-Louis explained, "But I spent some years in Paris at the Lycee of Louis le Grand. I learned about his work there."

Polichinelle stated firmly, "He is a dangerous man."

Pantaloon agreed, "Indeed, you are right. He is clever. I will not deny that, although I find little use for writers myself. But he has a dark cleverness that spreads many of these dangerous new ideas. I think writers like him should be stopped."

Andre-Louis said, "Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr would probably agree with you. He is the gentleman who turns this shared public land into his own private property just by deciding to do so." Andre-Louis drained his cup. It had been filled with the cheap pale wine that the actors drank.

That remark might have started an argument. However, it also reminded Monsieur Binet of the rules for camping there. He realized that their half-hour break was long over. He quickly jumped to his feet with an agility that was surprising for such a heavy man. He began issuing commands like a general on a battlefield.

He shouted, "Come on, my boys! Are we going to sit here drinking all day? Time is passing. We have a lot to do if we are to enter Guichen at noon. Go and get dressed. We are packing up the camp in twenty minutes. Hurry up, ladies! Go to your carriage and make sure you look your best. The eyes of Guichen will soon be on you. The food in your bellies tomorrow will depend on the impression your looks make today. Get moving! Away with you!"

The strict obedience this dictator demanded set everyone into a flurry of motion. They dragged out baskets and boxes to hold the plates and leftovers from their small meal. They cleared the ground in an instant. The three ladies headed to the carriage, which was set aside for their use. The men were already climbing into the house on wheels when Binet turned to Andre-Louis.

Binet spoke dramatically, "We part ways here, sir. We are richer for having met you. We are your debtors and your friends." He held out his chubby hand.

Andre-Louis slowly shook his hand. He had been thinking quickly over the last few moments. He remembered the safety he had found from his pursuers by staying with this group. He realized that he could not find a better hiding place right now. He needed to stay hidden until the search for him faded away.

Andre-Louis replied, "Sir, the debt is on my side. It is not every day that one has the joy of sitting down with such a famous and charming group."

Binet's small eyes stared suspiciously at the young man, looking for any sign of sarcasm. He found only honesty and genuine respect.

Andre-Louis continued, "I leave you with regret. I am even more reluctant to leave because I do not see a strict need for us to part."

Binet frowned and asked, "What do you mean?" He slowly pulled his hand away, which Andre-Louis had held onto longer than necessary.

Andre-Louis explained, "Look at it this way. You can see me as a wandering knight looking for adventure, with no real purpose in life right now. You should not be surprised that meeting you and your distinguished troupe has made me want to get to know you better. On your side, you mentioned that you need someone to replace your Figaro. You called him Felicien, I believe. While it might be bold of me to hope that I could handle such a varied and difficult job..."

Binet interrupted him, "You are using that sharp humor of yours again, my friend." He narrowed his small eyes and added thoughtfully, "Aside from that, we might be able to discuss this offer you seem to be making."

Andre-Louis said, "Unfortunately, we cannot put anything aside. If you take me on, you must take me exactly as I am. What other choice is there? As for this humor that you dislike, you might actually be able to turn it into a profit."

Binet asked, "How so?"

Andre-Louis answered, "In several ways. For example, I might be able to teach Leander how to act like a lover."

Pantaloon burst into laughter. "You certainly do not lack confidence in your own abilities. You are not troubled by modesty."

Andre-Louis replied, "That means I possess the first quality needed for an actor."

Binet asked, "Can you act?"

Andre-Louis thought about his speeches at Rennes and Nantes. He wondered if any of Pantaloon's stage improvisations had ever moved the hearts of crowds like his own speeches had. He answered, "I think I can, when the situation calls for it."

Monsieur Binet thought for a moment. He asked, "Do you know much about the theater?"

Andre-Louis answered, "I know everything."

Binet said, "Like I said, modesty will not be an obstacle in your career."

Andre-Louis argued, "But think about it. I know the works of modern writers like Beaumarchais, Eglantine, Mercier, and Chenier. Of course, I have also read Moliere, Racine, and Corneille, along with many smaller French writers. When it comes to foreign authors, I am very familiar with Gozzi, Goldoni, Guarini, Bibbiena, Machiavelli, Secchi, Tasso, Ariosto, and Fedini. As for ancient writers, I know most of the work by Euripides, Aristophanes, Terence, and Plautus."

Pantaloon roared, "Enough!"

Andre-Louis said, "I am not even close to finishing my list."

Binet replied, "You can save the rest for another day. In Heaven's name, what could have made you read so many play writers?"

Andre-Louis explained, "In my own small way, I study human nature. A few years ago, I realized that the best way to study mankind closely is through the reflections of life shown in the theater."

Pantaloon spoke quite seriously, "That is a very original and deep discovery. It had never occurred to me. Yet it is true. Sir, that truth brings dignity to our art. It is clear to me that you are a man of many talents. That has been clear since the moment I first met you. I can read people. I knew your character from the moment you said good morning. Tell me this. Do you think you could help me prepare a play scenario from time to time? My mind is constantly busy with a thousand details of running this group. It is not always as clear as I would like it to be for writing. Do you think you could help me with that?"

Andre-Louis said, "I am very sure that I could."

Binet muttered, "Hmm, yes. I was sure you would say that. You would soon learn the other duties that belonged to Felicien. Very well. If you are willing, you can come along with us. I suppose you would want some salary?"

Andre-Louis said, "If that is the usual practice."

Binet asked, "What would you say to ten livres a month?"

Andre-Louis replied, "I would say that it is hardly a grand fortune."

Binet said reluctantly, "I might go as high as fifteen. But times are hard."

Andre-Louis said, "I will make times better for you."

Binet replied, "I have no doubt you believe that. So we have an agreement?"

Andre-Louis said dryly, "Perfectly." And with that, he committed himself to a life in the theater.
