[Book 2 - Chapter 4: Exit Monsieur Parvissimus]

Chapter 4. Exit Monsieur Parvissimus

At four o'clock on Monday afternoon, the curtain rose on "Figaro-Scaramouche" to an audience that filled three quarters of the market hall. Monsieur Binet attributed this good attendance to the influx of people coming to Guichen for the fair, and to the magnificent parade his company had made through the streets of the township during the busiest time of the day. Andre-Louis attributed it entirely to the title. It was the "Figaro" touch that had brought in the better class bourgeoisie, which filled more than half of the twenty-sous places and three quarters of the twelve-sous seats. The lure had drawn them. Whether it was to continue to do so would depend upon the manner in which the canvas, over which he had labored for the glory of Binet, was interpreted by the company. He had no doubt about the merits of the canvas itself. The authors he had drawn upon for its elements were sound. He had taken their best work, which he claimed was nothing more than the justice they were due.

The company excelled itself. The audience followed the sly intriguings of Scaramouche with relish, delighted in the beauty and freshness of Climene, and was moved almost to tears by the hard fate which kept her from the hungering arms of the beautiful Leandre through four long acts. They howled with delight over the ignominy of Pantaloon, the buffooneries of his sprightly lackey Harlequin, and the strutting and bellowing fierceness of the cowardly Rhodomont.

The success of the Binet troupe in Guichen was assured. That night, the company drank Burgundy at Monsieur Binet's expense. The takings reached the sum of eight louis, which was as good business as Monsieur Binet had ever done in all his career. He was very pleased. Gratification rose like steam from his fat body. He even condescended so far as to attribute a share of the credit for the success to Monsieur Parvissimus.

"His suggestion was most valuable," he was careful to say, in order to properly limit that share, "as I perceived at the time."

"And his cutting of quills," growled Polichinelle. "Do not forget that. It is most important to have a man by you who understands how to cut a quill, which I shall remember when I turn author."

But not even that gibe could stir Monsieur Binet out of his lethargy of contentment.

On Tuesday, the success was repeated artistically and augmented financially. Ten louis and seven livres was the enormous sum that Andre-Louis, the doorkeeper, counted over to Monsieur Binet after the performance. Never yet had Monsieur Binet made so much money in one evening. A miserable little village like Guichen was certainly the last place he would have expected this windfall.

"Ah, but Guichen is in time of fair," Andre-Louis reminded him. "There are people here from as far as Nantes and Rennes to buy and sell. Tomorrow will be the last day of the fair, and the crowds will be greater than ever. We should better this evening's receipts."

"Better them? I shall be quite satisfied if we do as well, my friend."

"You can depend upon that," Andre-Louis assured him. "Are we to have Burgundy?"

And then the tragedy occurred. It announced itself in a succession of bumps and thuds, culminating in a crash outside the door that brought them all to their feet in alarm.

Pierrot sprang to open the door, and beheld the tumbled body of a man lying at the foot of the stairs. It emitted groans, so it was alive. Pierrot went forward to turn it over, and disclosed the fact that the body wore the wizened face of Scaramouche. It was a grimacing, groaning, twitching Scaramouche.

The whole company pressed after Pierrot and abandoned itself to laughter.

"I always said you should change parts with me," cried Harlequin. "You are such an excellent tumbler. Have you been practicing?"

"Fool!" Scaramouche snapped. "Must you be laughing when I have all but broken my neck?"

"You are right. We ought to be weeping because you did not break it. Come, man, get up." He held out a hand to the prostrate rogue.

Scaramouche took the hand, clutched it, and heaved himself from the ground, but then he dropped back again with a scream.

"My foot!" he complained.

Binet rolled through the group of players and scattered them to the right and left. Apprehension had been quick to seize him. Fate had played him such tricks before.

"What ails your foot?" he asked sourly.

"It is broken, I think," Scaramouche complained.

"Broken? Bah! Get up, man." He caught him under the armpits and hauled him up.

Scaramouche came howling to one foot. The other foot doubled under him when he attempted to set it down, and he must have collapsed again if Binet had not supported him. He filled the place with his complaints, while Binet swore amazingly and variedly.

"Must you bellow like a calf, you fool? Be quiet. Someone bring a chair here."

A chair was thrust forward, and he crushed Scaramouche down into it.

"Let us look at this foot of yours."

He swept away the shoe and stocking, heedless of the howls of pain from Scaramouche.

"What ails it?" he asked, staring. "There is nothing that I can see." He seized the foot with his heel in one hand and his instep in the other, and gyrated it. Scaramouche screamed in agony, until Climene caught Binet's arm and made him stop.

"My God, have you no feelings?" she reproved her father. "The lad has hurt his foot. Must you torture him? Will that cure it?"

"Hurt his foot!" said Binet. "I can see nothing the matter with his foot, and nothing to justify all this uproar. He has bruised it, maybe."

"A man with a bruised foot does not scream like that," said Madame over Climene's shoulder. "Perhaps he has dislocated it."

"That is what I fear," whimpered Scaramouche.

Binet heaved himself up in disgust.

"Take him to bed," he told them, "and fetch a doctor to see him."

This was done, and the doctor came. After seeing the patient, he reported that nothing very serious had happened, but that he had evidently sprained his foot a little in the fall. A few days of rest and all would be well.

"A few days!" cried Binet. "God of God! Do you mean that he cannot walk?"

"It would be unwise, and indeed impossible for more than a few steps."

Monsieur Binet paid the fee of the doctor, and sat down to think. He filled himself a glass of Burgundy, tossed it off without a word, and then sat staring into the empty glass.

"It is of course the sort of thing that must always be happening to me," he grumbled to no one in particular. The members of the company were all standing in silence before him and sharing his dismay. "I might have known that this, or something like it, would occur to spoil the first vein of luck that I have found in years. Ah, well, it is finished. Tomorrow we pack and depart. It is the best day of the fair, and we are on the crest of the wave of our success, with a good fifteen louis to be taken, and this happens! God of God!"

"Do you mean to abandon tomorrow's performance?"

Everyone turned to stare with Binet at Andre-Louis.

"Are we to play 'Figaro-Scaramouche' without Scaramouche?" asked Binet, sneering.

"Of course not." Andre-Louis came forward. "But surely some rearrangement of the parts is possible. For instance, there is a fine actor in Polichinelle."

Polichinelle swept him a bow. "I am overwhelmed," he said, ever sardonic.

"But he has a part of his own," objected Binet.

"A small part, which Pasquariel could play."

"And who will play Pasquariel?"

"Nobody. We delete it. The play need not suffer."

"He thinks of everything," sneered Polichinelle. "What a man!"

But Binet was far from agreement. "Are you suggesting that Polichinelle should play Scaramouche?" he asked, incredulously.

"Why not? He is able enough!"

"Overwhelmed again," interjected Polichinelle.

"Play Scaramouche with that figure?" Binet heaved himself up to point a denunciatory finger at the sturdy and thick-set shortness of Polichinelle.

"For lack of a better," said Andre-Louis.

"Overwhelmed more than ever." The bow of Polichinelle was superb this time. "Faith, I think I will take the air to cool me after so much blushing."

"Go to the devil," Binet flung at him.

"Better and better." Polichinelle made for the door. He halted on the threshold and struck an attitude. "Understand me, Binet. I do not now play Scaramouche in any circumstances whatever." And he went out. On the whole, it was a very dignified exit.

Andre-Louis shrugged, threw out his arms, and let them fall to his sides again. "You have ruined everything," he told Monsieur Binet. "The matter could easily have been arranged. Well, well, you are the master here, and since you want us to pack and be off, I suppose that is what we will do."

He went out, too. Monsieur Binet stood in thought for a moment, then followed him with his little eyes looking very cunning. He caught him up in the doorway. "Let us take a walk together, Monsieur Parvissimus," he said, very affably.

He thrust his arm through the arm of Andre-Louis, and led him out into the street, where there was still considerable movement. They went past the booths that ranged about the market, and down the hill towards the bridge. "I do not think we shall pack tomorrow," said Monsieur Binet, presently. "In fact, we shall play tomorrow night."

"Not if I know Polichinelle. You have..."

"I am not thinking of Polichinelle."

"Of whom, then?"

"Of yourself."

"I am flattered, sir. And in what capacity are you thinking of me?" There was something too sleek and oily in the voice of Binet for the taste of Andre-Louis.

"I am thinking of you in the part of Scaramouche."

"Day-dreams," said Andre-Louis. "You are amusing yourself, of course."

"Not in the least. I am quite serious."

"But I am not an actor."

"You told me that you could be."

"Oh, upon occasion, perhaps a small part."

"Well, here is a big part, and the chance to arrive at a single stride. How many men have had such a chance?"

"It is a chance I do not covet, Monsieur Binet. Shall we change the subject?" He was very frosty, as much perhaps because he scented something vague and menacing in the manner of Monsieur Binet as for any other reason.

"We will change the subject when I please," said Monsieur Binet, allowing a glimpse of steel to glimmer through the silk of his words. "Tomorrow night you play Scaramouche. You are ready enough in your wits, your figure is ideal, and you have just the kind of mordant humor for the part. You should be a great success."

"It is much more likely that I should be an egregious failure."

"That will not matter," said Binet cynically, and then explained himself. "The failure will be personal to yourself. The receipts will be safe by then."

"Much obliged," said Andre-Louis.

"We should take fifteen louis tomorrow night."

"It is unfortunate that you are without a Scaramouche," said Andre-Louis.

"It is fortunate that I have one, Monsieur Parvissimus."

Andre-Louis disengaged his arm. "I begin to find you tiresome," he said. "I think I will return."

"A moment, Monsieur Parvissimus. If I am to lose that fifteen louis, you will not take it amiss that I compensate myself in other ways?"

"That is your own concern, Monsieur Binet."

"Pardon, Monsieur Parvissimus. It may possibly be also yours." Binet took his arm again. "Do me the kindness to step across the street with me. Let us just go as far as the post-office there. I have something to show you."

Andre-Louis went. Before they reached the sheet of paper nailed upon the door, he knew exactly what it would say. It was in effect what he had supposed, stating that twenty louis would be paid for information leading to the apprehension of one Andre-Louis Moreau, a lawyer of Gavrillac, who was wanted by the King's Lieutenant in Rennes upon a charge of sedition.

Monsieur Binet watched him while he read. Their arms were linked, and the grip of Binet was firm and powerful.

"Now, my friend," he said, "will you be Monsieur Parvissimus and play Scaramouche tomorrow, or will you be Andre-Louis Moreau of Gavrillac and go to Rennes to satisfy the King's Lieutenant?"

"And if it should happen that you are mistaken?" asked Andre-Louis, his face a mask.

"I will take the risk of that," leered Monsieur Binet. "You mentioned, I think, that you were a lawyer. That was an indiscretion, my dear. It is unlikely that two lawyers will be in hiding at the same time in the same district. You see it is not really clever of me. Well, Monsieur Andre-Louis Moreau, lawyer of Gavrillac, what is it to be?"

"We will talk it over as we walk back," said Andre-Louis.

"What is there to talk over?"

"One or two things, I think. I must know where I stand. Come, sir, if you please."

"Very well," said Monsieur Binet, and they turned up the street again. However, Monsieur Binet maintained a firm hold on the arm of his young friend, and kept himself on the alert for any tricks that the young gentleman might be disposed to play. It was an unnecessary precaution. Andre-Louis was not the man to waste his energy futilely. He knew that in bodily strength he was no match at all for the heavy and powerful Pantaloon.

"If I yield to your most eloquent and seductive persuasions, Monsieur Binet," he said sweetly, "what guarantee do you give me that you will not sell me for twenty louis after I have served your turn?"

"You have my word of honor for that." Monsieur Binet was emphatic.

Andre-Louis laughed. "Oh, we are to talk of honor, are we? Really, Monsieur Binet? It is clear you think me a fool."

In the dark he did not see the flush that leapt to the round face of Monsieur Binet. It was some moments before he replied.

"Perhaps you are right," he growled. "What guarantee do you want?"

"I do not know what guarantee you can possibly give."

"I have said that I will keep faith with you."

"Until you find it more profitable to sell me."

"You have it in your power to make it more profitable always for me to keep faith with you. It is due to you that we have done so well in Guichen. Oh, I admit it frankly."

"In private," said Andre-Louis.

Monsieur Binet left the sarcasm unheeded.

"What you have done for us here with 'Figaro-Scaramouche,' you can do elsewhere with other things. Naturally, I shall not want to lose you. That is your guarantee."

"Yet tonight you would sell me for twenty louis."

"Because, name of God, you enrage me by refusing me a service well within your powers. Do you not think, had I been entirely the rogue you think me, I could have sold you on Saturday last? I want you to understand me, my dear Parvissimus."

"I beg that you will not apologize. You would be more tiresome than ever."

"Of course you will be gibing. You never miss a chance to gibe. It will bring you trouble before you are done with life. Come, here we are back at the inn, and you have not yet given me your decision."

Andre-Louis looked at him. "I must yield, of course. I cannot help myself."

Monsieur Binet released his arm at last, and slapped him heartily upon the back. "Well declared, my lad. You will never regret it. If I know anything of the theater, I know that you have made the great decision of your life. Tomorrow night you will thank me."

Andre-Louis shrugged, and stepped out ahead towards the inn. But Monsieur Binet called him back.

"Monsieur Parvissimus!"

He turned. There stood the great bulk of the man, the moonlight beating down upon that round fat face of his, and he was holding out his hand.

"Monsieur Parvissimus, no rancor. It is a thing I do not admit into my life. You will shake hands with me, and we will forget all this."

Andre-Louis considered him a moment with disgust. He was growing angry. Then, realizing this, he conceived himself ridiculous, almost as ridiculous as that sly and scoundrelly Pantaloon. He laughed and took the outstretched hand.

"No rancor?" Monsieur Binet insisted.

"Oh, no rancor," said Andre-Louis.
