Chapter 10. CONTRITION

Mademoiselle de Kercadiou walked with her aunt on the broad terrace of the Chateau de Sautron. It was a Sunday in March, and the morning sunshine was bright.

Despite her naturally sweet disposition, Aline had been unusually irritable lately. She showed signs of a cynical worldliness. This convinced Madame de Sautron more than ever that her brother Quintin had scandalously mishandled the girl's education. Aline seemed to know all the things a girl should be ignorant of, and to be ignorant of all the things a girl should know. At least, that was Madame de Sautron's opinion.

"Tell me, madame," Aline asked, "are all men beasts?" Unlike her brother, the Countess was tall and majestically built. Before her marriage to Monsieur de Sautron, malicious people used to say she was the only man in the family. From her impressive height, she now looked down at her little niece with startled eyes.

"Really, Aline, you have a way of asking the most disconcerting and improper questions."

"Perhaps it is because I find life disconcerting and improper."

"Life? A young girl should not discuss life."

"Why not, since I am alive? You don't suggest that it's improper to be alive, do you?"

"It is improper for a young, unmarried girl to seek to know too much about life. As for your absurd question about men, let me remind you that man is the noblest work of God. Perhaps you will consider that your answer."

Madame de Sautron did not invite further discussion of the subject. But Mademoiselle de Kercadiou's unconventional upbringing had made her headstrong.

"That being so," she asked, "will you tell me why they find such an overwhelming attraction in immodest women?"

Madame stood still and raised shocked hands. Then she looked down her handsome, high-bridged nose.

"Sometimes, often in fact, my dear Aline, you are utterly incomprehensible. I shall write to Quintin that the sooner you are married, the better it will be for everyone."

"Uncle Quintin has left that matter for me to decide," Aline reminded her.

Madame said with complete conviction, "That is the last and most outrageous of his errors. Who ever heard of a girl being allowed to decide her own marriage? It is almost indelicate to expose her to thoughts of such things." Madame de Sautron shuddered. "Quintin is a boor. His behavior is unheard of. Imagine Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr parading himself before you so you can decide if he's the proper man!" Again she shuddered. "It is so crude, almost... prurient. My God! When I married your uncle, all this was arranged between our parents. I first saw him when he came to sign the contract. I would have died of shame if it had been otherwise. And that is how these matters should be handled."

"You are no doubt right, madame. But since that is not how my own case is being conducted, you will forgive me if I deal with it differently. Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr wants to marry me. He has been allowed to court me. I would be glad to have him informed that he may stop doing so."

Madame de Sautron stood still, paralyzed with amazement. Her long face turned white. She seemed to breathe with difficulty.

"But... but what are you saying?" she gasped.

Quietly, Aline repeated her statement.

"But this is outrageous! You cannot be permitted to toy with a gentleman of the Marquis's standing! Why, it was barely a week ago that you allowed him to be told you would become his wife!"

"I did so in a moment of rashness. Since then, the Marquis's own conduct has convinced me of my error."

"But, my God!" cried the Countess. "Are you blind to the great honor being paid to you? The Marquis will make you the first lady in Brittany. Yet, little fool that you are, and greater fool that Quintin is, you trifle with this extraordinary good fortune! Let me warn you." She raised a warning forefinger. "If you continue in this foolish mood, Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr may definitely withdraw his offer. He would then depart in justified mortification."

"That, madame, as I am trying to tell you, is what I most desire."

"Oh, you are mad."

"It may be, madame, that I am sane in preferring to be guided by my instincts. It may even be that I am justified in resenting that the man who aspires to become my husband should, at the same time, be paying such diligent homage to a wretched theatre girl at the Feydau."

"Aline!"

"Is it not true? Or perhaps you do not find it strange that Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr should conduct himself this way at such a time?"

"Aline, you are so extraordinary a mixture. At times you shock me with your indecent expressions; at others you amaze me with your excessive prudery. You have been brought up like a little bourgeoise, I think. Yes, that's it—a little bourgeoise. Quintin was always something of a shopkeeper at heart."

"I was asking your opinion on the conduct of Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr, madame. Not on my own."

"But it's improper for you to notice such things. You should be unaware of them. I can't imagine who would be so... so insensitive as to tell you. But since you already know, you should at least pretend not to see things that happen outside the proper sphere of a well-behaved young lady."

"Will they still be outside my sphere when I'm married?"

"If you are wise, you will. You should remain ignorant of them. It... it spoils your innocence. I wouldn't want M. de La Tour d'Azyr to know you are so unusually informed. If you had been properly raised in a convent, this would never have happened."

Aline cried in despair, "But you're not answering me, madame! It's not my purity that's in question, but M. de La Tour d'Azyr's."

"Purity!" Madame's lips trembled with horror. Her face was overcome with it. "Where did you ever learn that dreadful, that utterly improper word?"

Then Madame de Sautron forced herself to control her emotions. She realized that great calm and caution were needed here. "My child, since you know so much that you shouldn't, there's no harm in my adding that a gentleman must have these little distractions."

"But why, madame? Why is it like that?"

"Ah, my God, you're asking me about the mysteries of nature. It is so because it is so. Because men are like that."

"You mean because men are beasts, which is what I started by asking you."

"You are stubbornly foolish, Aline."

"You mean I don't see things as you do, madame. I'm not overly demanding, as you seem to think. But surely I have the right to expect that while M. de La Tour d'Azyr is courting me, he won't also be courting some common actress. I feel there's a subtle connection between myself and that unspeakable creature, which dirties and insults me. The Marquis is a dull man. His courtship, at best, consists of stiff, stupid, and unoriginal compliments. They mean nothing when they come from lips still warm from that woman's contaminated kisses."

Madame was so utterly scandalized that for a moment she remained speechless. Then she spoke.

She exclaimed, "My God! I never would have suspected you of such an improper imagination."

"I can't help it, madame. Each time his lips touch my fingers, I find myself thinking of the last thing they touched. I immediately go to wash my hands. Next time, madame, unless you are kind enough to deliver my message to him, I will call for water and wash them in front of him."

"But what am I supposed to tell him? How... in what words can I deliver such a message?" Madame was aghast.

"Be frank with him, madame. It's easiest in the end. Tell him that no matter how impure his life may have been in the past, or how impure he intends it to be in the future, he must at least aim for purity while approaching a virgin for marriage, a virgin who is herself pure and without stain."

Madame recoiled and put her hands to her ears. Horror was etched on her handsome face. Her massive chest heaved.

She panted, "Oh, how can you? How can you use such terrible words? Where did you ever learn them?"

Aline said, "In church."

"Ah, but in church, many things are said that... that one would never dream of saying in society. My dear child, how could I possibly say such a thing to the Marquis? How could I possibly?"

"Shall I say it?"

"Aline!"

Aline said, "Well, there it is. Something must be done to protect me from insult. I am utterly disgusted with the Marquis. He is a disgusting man. And no matter how grand it might be to become Marquise de La Tour d'Azyr, frankly, I'd rather marry a cobbler who lives decently."

Her passion and clear determination were so strong that Madame de Sautron pulled herself out of her despair to try and persuade her. Aline was her niece, and such a marriage would bring honor to their entire family. At all costs, nothing must prevent it.

She said, "Listen, my dear. Let's be reasonable. The Marquis is away and won't be back until tomorrow."

"True. And I know where he has gone, or at least who he has gone with. My God, that common woman has a father and a crude fellow who intends to make her his wife, and neither of them chooses to do anything. I suppose they agree with you, madame, that a great gentleman must have his little distractions." Her contempt was as scorching as fire. "However, madame, what were you about to say?"

"That the day after tomorrow, you are returning to Gavrillac. M. de La Tour d'Azyr will most likely follow at his convenience."

"You mean when this dirty flame has burned out?"

"Call it what you will." Madame, you see, had by now given up on controlling her niece's improper language. "At Gavrillac, there will be no Mademoiselle Binet. This whole thing will be in the past. It's unfortunate that he met her at such a moment. The girl is very attractive, after all. You can't deny that. And you must make allowances."

"The Marquis formally proposed to me a week ago. I gave him my consent partly to satisfy the family's wishes, and partly..." She broke off, hesitating a moment, then continued with a note of dull pain, "Partly because it doesn't seem to matter much whom I marry. For the reasons I've given you, madame, I now definitely wish to withdraw that consent."

Madame became wildly agitated. She exclaimed, “Aline, I could never forgive you! Your uncle Quintin would be heartbroken. You don’t understand what you’re saying, what an incredible opportunity you’re turning down. Do you have no awareness of your status, of the position you were born into?”

Aline replied, “If I didn’t, madame, I would have ended things long ago. I’ve only tolerated this courtship for a moment because I understand the importance of a suitable marriage in a worldly sense. But I expect more from marriage, and Uncle Quintin has left the decision to me.”

“God forgive him!” Madame exclaimed. Then she hurried on, “Leave this to me now, Aline. Please, be guided by me. Oh, be guided by me!” Her tone was pleading. “I will consult with your uncle Charles. But don’t make a final decision until this unfortunate situation has passed. Charles will know how to handle it. Monsieur le Marquis will do penance, child, since your strictness demands it, but not in sackcloth and ashes. You won’t ask for that much, will you?”

Aline shrugged. “I ask nothing at all,” she said. This was neither agreement nor disagreement.

So Madame de Sautron spoke with her husband. He was a slight, middle-aged man, very aristocratic in appearance, and he possessed a certain shrewdness. She used the exact same tone with him that Aline had used with her, a tone Madame had found so unsettlingly indelicate in Aline. She even borrowed several of Aline’s phrases.

As a result, on Monday afternoon, when Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr’s returning carriage finally pulled up to the chateau, Monsieur le Comte de Sautron met him. The Count wanted a word with him even before he could change his clothes.

“Gervais, you’re a fool,” Monsieur le Comte began pointedly.

“Charles, you’re not telling me anything new,” Monsieur le Marquis replied. “What specific foolishness are you bothering to complain about?”

He threw himself wearily onto a sofa. His long, graceful body sprawled there as he looked up at his friend with a tired smile. His nobly handsome, pale face seemed to defy the onslaught of age.

“About your latest. This Binet girl.”

“That? Pooh! It was just an incident, hardly a foolish mistake.”

“A foolish mistake, at such a time,” Sautron insisted. The Marquis looked at him, silently asking a question. The Count answered it. “Aline,” he said meaningfully. “She knows. I can’t tell you how she knows, but she does, and she is deeply offended.”

The smile vanished from the Marquis’ face. He sat up straight.

“Offended?” he asked, his voice anxious.

“Yes, she is. You know what she’s like. You know the ideals she has. It hurts her that at a time like this, while you are here to court her, you are also pursuing this affair with that young Binet girl.”

“How do you know?” La Tour d’Azyr asked.

“She confided in her aunt. And the poor child seems to have a point. She says she won’t tolerate you coming to kiss her hand with lips still contaminated from… well, you understand. You can imagine the impact of such a thing on a pure, sensitive girl like Aline. She said—and I should tell you this—that the next time you kiss her hand, she will call for water and wash it in front of you.”

The Marquis’ face turned scarlet. He stood up. Knowing his violent, intolerant nature, Monsieur de Sautron expected an outburst. But no outburst came. The Marquis turned away from him and paced slowly to the window, his head bowed, his hands behind his back. He stopped there and spoke without turning. His voice was both scornful and wistful.

“You are right, Charles, I am a fool, a wicked fool! I have just enough sense left to realize it. It’s the way I’ve lived, I suppose. I’ve never felt the need to deny myself anything I wanted.” Then, suddenly, he spun around, and the outburst came. “But, my God, I want Aline as I’ve never wanted anything before! I think I’d kill myself in rage if I lost her through my foolishness.” He struck his forehead with his hand. “I am a beast!” he said. “I should have known that if that sweet saint heard about these petty devilries of mine, she would despise me. And I tell you, Charles, I’d go through fire to regain her respect.”

“I hope it can be regained on easier terms,” Charles said. Then, to lighten the situation, which was starting to annoy him with its seriousness, he made a weak joke. “It’s simply asked of you that you avoid going through certain fires that Mademoiselle doesn’t consider to be of a very purifying nature.”

“As for that Binet girl, it’s finished. Finished,” the Marquis said.

“I congratulate you. When did you make that decision?”

“This moment. I wish to God I had made it twenty-four hours ago. As it is,” he shrugged, “twenty-four hours of her were enough for me, as they would have been for any man. She’s a mercenary, self-seeking little baggage with the soul of a prostitute. Bah!” He shuddered in disgust at himself and her.

“Ah! That makes it easier for you,” Monsieur de Sautron said cynically.

“Don’t say it, Charles. That’s not true. If you had been less of a fool, you would have warned me sooner.”

“I may prove to have warned you soon enough if you profit from the warning.”

“There is no penance I won’t do. I will prostrate myself at her feet. I will humble myself before her. I will confess with a proper spirit of contrition, and with Heaven’s help, I’ll stick to my resolution to change for her sweet sake.” He was tragically earnest.

To Monsieur de Sautron, who had only ever seen him as self-contained, supercilious, and mocking, this was an astonishing revelation. He almost recoiled from it. It felt like prying, like peeping through a keyhole. He slapped his friend’s shoulder.

“My dear Gervais, this is a magnificently romantic mood. Enough said. Stick to it, and I promise you that everything will soon be well. I will be your ambassador, and you will have no reason to complain.”

“But may I not go to her myself?”

“If you are wise, you will disappear at once. Write to her if you wish; you can make your apology in a letter. I will explain why you left without seeing her. I will tell her you did so on my advice, and I will do it tactfully. I am a good diplomat, Gervais. Trust me.”

The Marquis raised his head, showing a face seared by pain. He held out his hand. “Very well, Charles. Help me with this, and know I will always be your friend.”
