CHAPTER 9. THE AWAKENING

Climene said, "Do you know that I am waiting for the explanation I think you owe me?"

They were alone together, still lingering at the table where André-Louis had arrived late. André-Louis was filling his pipe. Lately, since joining the Binet Troupe, he had started smoking. The others had gone, some to take the air, and others, like Binet and Madame, felt it would be discreet to leave the two of them alone for the explanations that were sure to come. André-Louis did not share that feeling. He lit a match and slowly applied it to his pipe. A frown settled on his brow.

"Explanation?" he asked after a moment, looking at her. "But about what?"

"About the deception you've practiced on us, on me."

"I have practiced none," he assured her.

"You mean you've simply kept your own counsel, and that silence isn't deception. But it is deceitful to withhold facts about yourself and your true status from your future wife. You shouldn't have pretended to be a simple country lawyer, which, of course, anyone could see you're not. It may have been very romantic, but... Anyway, will you explain?"

"I see," he said, and took a puff from his pipe. "But you are wrong, Climene. I have practiced no deception. If there are things about me that I haven't told you, it's because I didn't consider them very important. But I have never deceived you by pretending to be someone I'm not. I am exactly as I've presented myself."

His persistence began to annoy her. The annoyance showed on her charming face and colored her voice.

"Hah! And that noble lady with whom you are so intimate, who carried you off in her cabriolet with so little regard for me? What is she to you?"

"A sort of sister," he said.

"A sort of sister!" She was indignant. "Harlequin predicted you'd say that, but he was just amusing himself. It wasn't very funny. It's even less funny coming from you. She has a name, I suppose, this 'sort of sister'?"

"Certainly she has a name. She is Mademoiselle Aline de Kercadiou, the niece of Quintin de Kercadiou, Lord of Gavrillac."

"Oh ho! That's quite a fine name for your 'sort of sister.' What kind of sister, my friend?"

For the first time in their relationship, he noticed and regretted the hint of vulgarity, of shrewishness, in her manner.

"It would have been more accurate for me to say a sort of reputed left-handed cousin."

"A reputed left-handed cousin! And what kind of relationship is that? Honestly, you dazzle me with your clarity."

"It needs to be explained."

"That's what I've been telling you. But you seem very reluctant to explain."

"Oh, no. It's just that they're so unimportant. But you be the judge. Her uncle, Monsieur de Kercadiou, is my godfather. She and I have been playmates since infancy. It's widely believed in Gavrillac that Monsieur de Kercadiou is my father. He has certainly cared for my upbringing from my earliest years, and it's entirely thanks to him that I was educated at Louis le Grand. I owe him everything that I have, or rather, everything that I had. Because of my own free will, I've cut myself adrift. Today, I possess nothing except what I can earn for myself in the theater or elsewhere."

She sat stunned and pale under that cruel blow to her swelling pride. If he had told her this just yesterday, it would have made no impression on her. It wouldn't have mattered at all. Today's events, coming as a sequel, would only have enhanced him in her eyes. But coming now, after her imagination had woven such a magnificent background for him, after the rashly assumed discovery of his splendid identity had made her the envy of the entire company, after she had, in her own eyes and theirs, been enshrined as a great lady by marrying him, this disclosure crushed and humiliated her. Her prince in disguise was merely the outcast illegitimate son of a country gentleman! She would be the laughingstock of every member of her father's troupe, of all those who had so recently envied her this romantic good fortune.

"You should have told me this before," she said, in a dull voice she struggled to keep steady.

"Perhaps I should. But does it really matter?"

"Matter?" She suppressed her fury to ask another question. "You say that this Monsieur de Kercadiou is popularly believed to be your father. What exactly do you mean?"

"Just that. It's a belief I don't share. It's a matter of instinct, perhaps, for me. Moreover, once I asked Monsieur de Kercadiou point-blank, and I received a denial from him. It's not, perhaps, a denial one would attach too much importance to under all circumstances. Yet I have never known Monsieur de Kercadiou as anything but a man of the strictest honor, and I would hesitate to disbelieve him, particularly when his statement aligns with my own instincts. He assured me that he didn't know who my father was."

"And your mother, was she equally ignorant?" She was sneering, but he didn't notice it. Her back was to the light.

"He wouldn't disclose her name to me. He confessed she was a dear friend of his."

She startled him by laughing, and her laugh was unpleasant.

"A very dear friend, you may be sure, you simpleton. What name do you bear?"

He restrained his own rising indignation to answer her question calmly: "Moreau. It was given me, I'm told, from the Brittany village where I was born. But I have no claim to it. In fact, I have no name, unless it's Scaramouche, a title I've earned. So you see, my dear," he ended with a smile, "I haven't practiced any deception at all."

"No, no. I see that now." She laughed without mirth. Then she drew a deep breath and rose. "I am very tired," she said.

He was on his feet in an instant, full of concern. But she waved him wearily back.

"I think I'll rest until it's time to go to the theatre." She moved towards the door, dragging her feet a little. He sprang to open it, and she passed out without looking at him.

Her brief romantic dream was over. The glorious world of fantasy she had built with such elaborate detail in the last hour, a world she believed it was her destiny to rule, now lay shattered at her feet. Its debris became so many stumbling blocks, preventing her from returning to her former contentment with Scaramouche as he truly was.

André-Louis sat in the window embrasure, smoking and looking idly out across the river. He felt both intrigued and thoughtful. He had shocked her. That much was clear, but the reason wasn't. His confession of being nameless shouldn't have particularly hurt him in the eyes of a girl raised in Climene's surroundings. Yet, it was fully apparent that his confession had injured him.

There, still lost in thought, Columbine found him a half-hour later when she returned.

"All alone, my prince!" she greeted him, laughing. This suddenly illuminated his mental confusion. Climene had been disappointed in the hopes that the players' wild imaginations had built up around his meeting with Aline. Poor child! He smiled whimsically at Columbine.

"I'm likely to be so for some time," he said, "until it becomes common knowledge that I'm not a prince after all."

"Not a prince? Oh, then a duke, or at least a marquis."

"Not even a chevalier, unless it's of the order of fortune. I am just Scaramouche. My castles are all in Spain."

Disappointment clouded her lively, good-natured face.

"And I had imagined you..."

"I know," he interrupted. "That's the problem." He could have gauged the extent of that problem by Climene's conduct that evening. She was with the gentlemen of fashion who now clustered in the green-room between acts, paying homage to the incomparable amoureuse. Previously, she had received them with a caution that commanded respect. Tonight, she was recklessly gay, impudent, almost wanton.

He spoke of it gently to her as they walked home together, advising more prudence in the future.

"We aren't married yet," she told him tartly. "Wait until then before you criticize my conduct."

"I trust there will be no occasion then," he said.

"You trust? Ah, yes. You are very trusting."

"Climene, I have offended you. I am sorry."

"It is nothing," she said. "You are what you are." Still, he wasn't concerned. He understood the source of her bad mood. He deplored it, but because he understood, he forgave. He also noticed that her father shared her bad mood, and this frankly amused him. Towards Monsieur Binet, a tolerant contempt was the only feeling that complete acquaintance could inspire. As for the rest of the company, they were inclined to be very kindly towards Scaramouche. It was almost as if he had truly fallen from the high status to which their imaginations had raised him. Or perhaps it was because they saw the effect that his fall from his temporary and fictitious elevation had produced upon Climene.

Leandre alone was an exception. His usual melancholy seemed to be dispelled at last, and his eyes now gleamed with malicious satisfaction when they rested upon Scaramouche. Occasionally, he continued to address Scaramouche with sly mockery as "mon prince."

The next day, André-Louis saw little of Climene. This wasn't unusual, as he was very busy again, preparing for "Figaro-Scaramouche," which was to be played on Saturday. In addition to his many theatrical occupations, he now devoted an hour every morning to studying fencing at an academy of arms. He did this not only to fix a gap in his education, but also, and mainly, to give him more grace and poise on stage. That morning, his mind was distracted by thoughts of both Climene and Aline. Oddly enough, it was Aline who caused him deeper unease. He considered Climene's attitude a passing phase that didn't need to seriously concern him. But the thought of Aline's behavior towards him kept bothering him, and even more deeply, the thought of her possible betrothal to Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr.

This forcefully reminded him of the mission he had taken on, a mission he had largely forgotten by now. He had boasted that he would make the voice Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr tried to silence ring throughout the entire country. But what had he actually done of all he had boasted? He had incited the mobs of Rennes and Nantes with words poor Philippe might have used. Then, because of a hue and cry, he had fled like a cur and taken shelter in the first available kennel, there to lie quiet and devote himself to other, self-serving things. What a stark contrast between the promise and the fulfillment!

André-Louis thought this to himself, filled with self-contempt. While he trifled away his time, playing Scaramouche, and centered all his hopes on eventually becoming a rival to men like Chenier and Mercier, Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr continued his proud ways, unchallenged, and did as he pleased. It was pointless to tell himself that the seed he had sown was bearing fruit. It was pointless to claim that the demands he had voiced in Nantes for the Third Estate had been granted by Monsieur Necker, thanks largely to the commotion his anonymous speech had caused. That wasn't his concern or his mission. It wasn't his job to regenerate mankind, or even to regenerate the social structure of France. His concern was to ensure that Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr paid every last liard for the brutal wrong he had done Philippe de Vilmorin. And it didn't increase his self-respect to realize that the danger of Aline being married to the Marquis was the real spur to his anger and to remembering his vow. He was, perhaps too unjustly, inclined to dismiss his own arguments as mere sophistries. These arguments claimed there was nothing he could do, and that, in fact, he only had to show his face to find himself arrested and sent to Rennes, making his final exit from the world's stage by way of the gallows.

It's impossible to read that part of his "Confessions" without feeling a certain pity for him. You realize what his state of mind must have been. You realize how he was a prey to such conflicting emotions. If you have the imagination to put yourself in his place, you will also realize how impossible any decision was, except for the one he says he reached: that he would act the moment he saw a direction that would serve his real aims.

It happened that the first person he saw when he took the stage that Thursday evening was Aline. The second was the Marquis de La Tour d’Azyr. They occupied a box to the right of, and immediately above, the stage. Others were with them, notably a thin, elderly, resplendent lady whom André-Louis supposed to be Madame la Comtesse de Sautron. But at the time, he had eyes only for those two, who had recently haunted his thoughts so much. The sight of either of them would have been unsettling enough. Seeing both together very nearly made him forget why he had come onto the stage. Then he pulled himself together and played. He played, he says, with unusual nerve, and never in his brief but eventful career was he more applauded.

That was the evening's first shock. The next came after the second act. Entering the green-room, he found it more crowded than usual. At the far end, with Climene, was Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr. He was bending over her from his impressive height, his eyes fixed on her face, while his smiling lips moved in conversation. He had her entirely to himself, a privilege none of the men of fashion who usually visited the coulisse had yet enjoyed. Those lesser gentlemen had all retreated before the Marquis, like jackals before a lion.

André-Louis stared for a moment, stunned. Then, recovering from his surprise, he critically observed the Marquis. He considered his beauty, grace, and splendor, his courtly air, and his complete, unshakable self-possession. But more than anything, he considered the expression in the dark eyes that were devouring Climene’s lovely face, and his own lips tightened.

Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr never noticed him or his stare. Even if he had, he wouldn't have known who was looking at him from behind Scaramouche's make-up. And even if he had known, he wouldn't have been troubled or concerned in the slightest.

André-Louis sat down apart, his mind in turmoil. Soon, a mincing young gentleman addressed him, and he managed to answer as expected. Since Climene had been sequestered like this, and Columbine was already thickly besieged by gallants, the lesser visitors had to content themselves with Madame and the male members of the troupe. Monsieur Binet, in fact, was the center of a lively group that shook with laughter at his witty remarks. He seemed to have suddenly emerged from the gloom of the last two days into a high good mood. Scaramouche observed how persistently his eyes kept flickering between his daughter and her splendid courtier.

That night, André-Louis and Climène had a big argument, which Climène started. When André-Louis again, and more insistently, urged his fiancée to be careful, begging her to watch how much she encouraged the advances of a man like Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr, she became completely abusive. Her fiercely sharp tone and unexpectedly powerful insults shocked and stunned him.

He tried to reason with her. Finally, she laid down some conditions.

"If you've become engaged to me just to stand in my way, the sooner we end things, the better."

"You don't love me, then, Climène?"

"Love has nothing to do with it. I won't tolerate your senseless jealousy. A girl in the theater needs to accept admiration from everyone."

"Agreed. And there's no harm, provided she gives nothing in exchange."

She turned on him then, white-faced, with flaming eyes.

"Now, what exactly do you mean?"

"My meaning is clear. A girl in your position may receive all the admiration that's offered. But she must receive it with a dignified distance, clearly implying she has no favors to give in return, beyond a smile. If she is wise, she will make sure that the admiration is always offered by her admirers as a group. No single one among them should ever have the privilege of approaching her alone. If she is wise, she will give no encouragement, and not nourish hopes that she might later be unable to deny."

"How? You dare?"

He answered her, "I know my world. And I know Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr. He is a man without charity, almost without humanity. He takes what he wants wherever he finds it, whether it's given willingly or not. He cares nothing for the misery he spreads on his selfish path. His only law is force. Think about it, Climène, and ask yourself if I am dishonoring you by warning you."

He went out after that, feeling it beneath him to continue the conversation.

The days that followed were unhappy for him, and for at least one other person. That other was Leander, who was plunged into deep despair by Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr’s constant attention to Climène. The Marquis was seen at every performance. A box was always reserved for him, and he invariably came either alone or with his cousin, Monsieur de Chabrillane.

On Tuesday of the following week, André-Louis went out alone early in the morning. He was in a bad mood, troubled by an overwhelming feeling of humiliation, and he hoped to clear his head with a walk. As he turned the corner of the Place du Bouffay, he ran into a slight, pale-faced gentleman. The man was very neatly dressed in black, wearing a tie-wig under a round hat. He stepped back when he saw André-Louis, raising a spyglass. Then he called out to him, his voice full of amazement.

"Moreau! Where the devil have you been hiding yourself these months?"

It was Le Chapelier, the lawyer, and the leader of the Literary Chamber of Rennes.

Scaramouche said, "Behind the skirts of Thespis."

"I don't understand."

"I didn't intend for you to. How are you, Isaac? And what about the world, which seems to have been standing still lately?"

Le Chapelier laughed, "Standing still! But where have you been, then? Standing still!" He pointed across the square to a café in the shadow of the gloomy prison. "Let's go and drink a bavaroise. Of all men, you are the one we want, the man we have been seeking everywhere. And look! You drop from the skies right into my path."

They crossed the square and entered the café.

"So you think the world has been standing still! My God! I suppose you haven't heard of the royal order for the calling of the States-General, or its terms. That we are to have what we demanded, what you demanded for us here in Nantes! You haven't heard that the order has gone out for the primary elections, the elections of the electors. You haven't heard of the new uproar in Rennes last month. The order was that the three estates should sit together at the States-General of the bailliages. But in the bailliage of Rennes, the nobles are always defiant. They actually took up arms, six hundred of them with their valetaille, headed by your old friend Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr. They were for slashing us, the members of the Third Estate, into ribbons to put an end to our insolence." He laughed softly. "But, by God, we showed them that we, too, could take up arms. It was what you yourself advocated here in Nantes last November. We fought them a fierce battle in the streets, under the leadership of your namesake Moreau, the provost. We so battered them that they were glad to take shelter in the Cordelier Convent. That is the end of their resistance to royal authority and the people's will."

He continued at great speed, detailing the events that had taken place. Finally, he came to the matter which, he announced, had been causing him to hunt for André-Louis until he had almost despaired of finding him.

Nantes was sending fifty delegates to the assembly of Rennes, which was to select the deputies for the Third Estate and draft their cahier of grievances. Rennes itself was just as fully represented, while villages like Gavrillac were sending two delegates for every two hundred households or less. Each of these three had demanded that André-Louis Moreau be one of its delegates. Gavrillac wanted him because he was from the village, and they knew there what sacrifices he had made for the popular cause. Rennes wanted him because it had heard his passionate address on the day the students were shot. And Nantes, to whom his identity was unknown, asked for him as the speaker who had addressed them under the name of Omnes Omnibus. He had also drafted for them the memorial that was widely believed to have influenced Monsieur Necker in formulating the terms of the convocation.

Since he could not be found, the delegations had been formed without him. But now, one or two vacancies had opened up in the Nantes representation. Filling these vacancies was the reason Le Chapelier had come to Nantes.

André-Louis firmly shook his head in answer to Le Chapelier’s proposal.

"You refuse?" the other cried. "Are you mad? Refuse, when you are requested by so many groups? Do you realize that it is more than probable you will be elected one of the deputies? That you will be sent to the States-General at Versailles to represent us in this work of saving France?"

But André-Louis, as we know, was not concerned with saving France. At the moment, he was concerned with saving two women, both of whom he loved, though in very different ways, from a man he had vowed to ruin. He remained firm in his refusal until Le Chapelier dejectedly gave up the attempt to persuade him.

André-Louis said, "It is odd that I should have been so deeply absorbed in trivial matters as never to have noticed that Nantes is being politically active."

"Active! My friend, it is a boiling cauldron of political emotions. It is kept quiet on the surface only because people are convinced that all is well. At a hint to the contrary, it would boil over."

"Is that so?" Scaramouche said thoughtfully. "That knowledge might be useful." Then he changed the subject. "You know La Tour d'Azyr is here?"

"In Nantes? He's got nerve if he shows himself. The people of Nantes aren't docile, and they know his history and the part he played in the uprising at Rennes. I'm amazed they haven't stoned him yet. But they will, sooner or later. Someone just needs to suggest it."

"That's very likely," André-Louis said, and smiled. "He doesn't show himself much, not in the streets, at least. So he doesn't have the courage you suppose; nor any kind of courage, as I once told him. He only has insolence."

As they parted, Le Chapelier again urged him to consider his proposal. "Let me know if you change your mind. I'm staying at the Cerf, and I'll be here until the day after tomorrow. If you have ambition, this is your moment."

"I suppose I have no ambition," André-Louis said, and left.

That night at the theater, he had a mischievous impulse to test what Le Chapelier had told him about the public's mood in the city. They were performing "The Terrible Captain." In the last act, Scaramouche reveals the utter cowardice of the bullying braggart Rhodomont.

After the laughter that always followed the exposure of the roaring captain, Scaramouche would then contemptuously dismiss him with a phrase that changed nightly, depending on his inspiration. This time, he decided to give his line a political twist:

"Oh, you boastful coward, your emptiness is exposed. Because of your tall stature, the great sword you carry, and the way you cock your hat, people have feared you. They've believed in you. They've imagined you to be as terrible and formidable as you insolently make yourself appear. But at the first touch of true spirit, you crumple up. You tremble. You whine pitifully, and that great sword stays in its scabbard. You remind me of the Privileged Orders when confronted by the Third Estate."

It was audacious of him. He was prepared for anything: laughter, applause, indignation, or all of it at once. But he wasn't prepared for what actually happened. It came so suddenly and spontaneously from the groundlings and the audience in the amphitheater that he was almost scared by it. He felt like a boy who had held a match to a sun-scorched hayrick. It was a hurricane of furious applause. Men leapt to their feet. They sprang onto the benches, waving their hats in the air. Their terrific uproar of acclamations deafened him. It rolled on and on, and didn't stop until the curtain fell.

Scaramouche stood, smiling thoughtfully with tight lips. At the last moment, he had glimpsed Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr's face. It was thrust farther forward than usual from the shadows of his box. His face was set in anger, his eyes on fire.

"My God!" Rhodomont laughed, recovering from the genuine fright that had replaced his theatrical terror. "But you have a great trick for getting to them, Scaramouche."

Scaramouche looked up at him and smiled. "It can be useful on occasion," he said, and went off to his dressing room to change.

But a reprimand awaited him. He was delayed at the theater by issues concerning the scenery for the new play they were to stage the next day. By the time he was finished with the business, the rest of the company had long since left. He called for a sedan chair and had himself carried back to the inn alone. It was one of many minor luxuries his relatively affluent current circumstances allowed.

As he entered the upstairs room, which was common to all the troupe, he found Monsieur Binet talking loudly and vehemently. He had heard his voice while still on the stairs. As he entered, Binet stopped short and turned to face him.

"You are here at last!" It was such an odd greeting that André-Louis merely looked mildly surprised. "I await your explanations for the disgraceful scene you provoked tonight."

"Disgraceful? Is it disgraceful for the public to applaud me?"

"The public? You mean the rabble. Do you want to deprive us of the patronage of all gentlefolk by making vulgar appeals to the low passions of the mob?"

André-Louis stepped past Monsieur Binet and walked to the table. He shrugged contemptuously. The man offended him, after all.

"You exaggerate grossly, as usual."

"I do not exaggerate. And I am the master in my own theater. This is the Binet Troupe, and it will be run the Binet way."

"Who are these gentlefolk whose lost patronage to the Feydau will be so keenly felt?" André-Louis asked.

"You imply there are none? See how wrong you are. After the play tonight, Monsieur le Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr came to me. He spoke to me in the severest terms about your scandalous outburst. I was forced to apologize, and..."

"More fool you," André-Louis said. "A man who respected himself would have shown that gentleman the door." Monsieur Binet's face began to turn purple. "You call yourself the head of the Binet Troupe. You boast that you will be master in your own theater. Yet you stand like a lackey to take orders from the first insolent fellow who comes to your green room. He tells you he doesn't like a line spoken by one of your company! I say again, if you had truly respected yourself, you would have turned him out."

Several members of the company murmured their approval. They had heard the arrogant tone the Marquis used, and they were filled with resentment against the slur cast upon them all.

"And I say further," André-Louis went on, "a man who respects himself, for entirely different reasons, would have been only too glad to seize this pretext to show Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr the door."

"What do you mean by that?" His question held a rumble of thunder.

André-Louis's eyes swept around the company assembled at the supper table. "Where is Climene?" he asked sharply.

Leander leapt up to answer him, his face white, tense and quivering with excitement.

"She left the theater in the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr's carriage immediately after the performance. We heard him offer to drive her to this inn."

André-Louis glanced at the clock on the overmantel. He seemed unnaturally calm.

"That would be an hour ago, rather more. And she has not yet arrived?"

His eyes met M. Binet’s. M. Binet’s eyes avoided his glance. Again, Leander answered him.

"Not yet."

"Ah!" André-Louis sat down and poured himself wine. An oppressive silence filled the room. Leander watched him expectantly, Columbine sympathetically. Even M. Binet seemed to be waiting for a cue from Scaramouche. But Scaramouche disappointed him. "Have you left me anything to eat?" he asked.

Platters were pushed towards him. He calmly helped himself to food and ate in silence, apparently with a good appetite. M. Binet sat down, poured himself wine, and drank. Presently, he tried to make conversation with one person and then another. He received curt, monosyllabic answers. M. Binet did not seem to be in favor with his troupe that night.

Finally, a rumble of wheels sounded below, followed by the rattle of halting hooves. Then came voices, Climene's high, trilling laugh floating upwards. André-Louis continued eating, unconcerned.

"What an actor!" Harlequin whispered to Polichinelle, and Polichinelle nodded gloomily.

She entered like a leading lady taking the stage, head high, chin thrust forward, eyes dancing with laughter. She exuded triumph and arrogance. Her cheeks were flushed, and her mass of nut-brown hair, which crowned her head, was somewhat disheveled. In her left hand, she carried an enormous bouquet of white camellias. A diamond of great price on her middle finger immediately drew everyone's eyes with its brilliance.

Her father sprang to meet her with an unusually tender display of paternal affection. "At last, my child!"

He led her to the table. She sank into a chair, a little wearily, a little limply, but the smile did not leave her face, not even when she glanced across at Scaramouche. Only Leander, observing her closely with a hungry, scowling stare, detected a hint of fear in her hazel eyes, briefly visible as her eyelids fluttered.

André-Louis, however, continued eating calmly, without even a glance in her direction. Gradually, the company realized that a confrontation was brewing, but it would not happen as long as they remained. Polichinelle finally gave the signal by standing up and leaving, and within two minutes, only M. Binet, his daughter, and André-Louis remained in the room. Then, at last, André-Louis put down his knife and fork, took a drink of Burgundy, and leaned back in his chair to look at Climene.

"I trust," he said, "that you had a pleasant ride, mademoiselle."

"Most pleasant, monsieur." Impudently, she tried to match his calm demeanor, but did not completely succeed.

"And quite profitable, if I may judge that jewel from this distance. It should be worth at least a couple of hundred louis, and that is a considerable sum even for a wealthy nobleman like M. de La Tour d’Azyr. Would it be rude for someone who once thought of becoming your husband to ask you, mademoiselle, what you have given him in return?"

M. Binet let out a crude laugh, an odd mix of cynicism and contempt.

"I have given nothing," said Climene, indignantly.

"Ah! Then the jewel is a kind of advance payment."

"My God, man, you're being indecent!" M. Binet protested.

"Decent?" André-Louis' smoldering eyes blazed with such contempt at M. Binet that the old rogue squirmed uncomfortably in his chair. "Did you mention decency, Binet? You're almost making me lose my temper, and I hate that more than anything!" Slowly, his glance returned to Climene, who sat with her elbows on the table, her chin resting in her palms, looking at him with a mix of scorn and defiance. "Mademoiselle," he said slowly, "purely for your own good, I desire you to think about where you are headed."

"I am perfectly capable of thinking for myself and deciding without your advice, monsieur."

"And now you've got your answer," chuckled Binet. "I hope you like it."

André-Louis had paled a little. Disbelief showed in his large, dark eyes as they continued to steadily regard her. He ignored M. Binet.

"Surely, mademoiselle, you cannot mean that willingly, with your eyes wide open and fully understanding what you are doing, you would trade an honorable marriage for... for whatever men like M. de La Tour d’Azyr have planned for you?"

M. Binet gestured broadly and turned to his daughter. "You hear him, the sanctimonious prude! Perhaps you'll finally believe that marrying him would ruin you. He would always be there, the inconvenient husband, to spoil your every opportunity, my girl."

She nodded her beautiful head in agreement with her father. "I'm starting to find him tiresome with his silly jealousies," she confessed. "As a husband, I'm afraid he would be impossible."

André-Louis felt a tightness in his chest. But, ever the actor, he showed nothing of it. He laughed a little, not very pleasantly, and rose.

"I respect your choice, mademoiselle. I hope you do not regret it."

"Regret it?" cried M. Binet. He was laughing, relieved to finally be rid of this suitor he had never approved of, except for those few hours when he actually thought him a distinguished eccentric. "And what would she regret? Accepting the protection of a nobleman so powerful and wealthy that he gives her a jewel as a mere trinket, a jewel worth as much as an actress earns in a year at the Comedie Francaise?" He got up and walked towards André-Louis. His tone softened. "Come, come, my friend, no hard feelings now. What the devil! You wouldn't stand in the girl's way, would you? You can't really blame her for this choice. Have you considered what it means to her? Under the protection of such a gentleman, there's no limit to what she can achieve. Don't you see how incredibly lucky this is? Surely, if you care for her, especially with your jealous nature, you wouldn't want it any other way?"

André-Louis looked at him in silence for a long moment. Then he laughed again. "Oh, you are fantastic," he said. "You are not real." He spun on his heel and walked quickly to the door.

His actions, and even more, the contempt in his look, laugh, and words, enraged M. Binet. His agreeable mood vanished.

“Fantastic, are we?” he cried. His small eyes, now utterly evil, followed the departing Scaramouche. “Fantastic that we should prefer the powerful protection of this great nobleman to marriage with a beggarly, nameless bastard. Oh, yes, we are truly fantastic!”

André-Louis turned, his hand on the doorknob. “No,” he said. “I was mistaken. You are not fantastic. You are just vile, both of you.” And he left.
