[Book 2 - Chapter 7: The Conquest of Nantes]

Chapter 7. The Conquest of Nantes

The Binet Troupe opened in Nantes on the Feast of the Purification with "The Rogueries of Scaramouche", a fact you can still discover in surviving copies of the "Courrier Nantais". They did not come to Nantes as they had previously gone to little country villages and townships. In the past, they had arrived unheralded and depended entirely on the parade of their entrance to attract attention. André-Louis had borrowed from the business methods of the Comédie-Française. He handled matters entirely in his own masterful fashion. He had ordered the printing of playbills at Redon, and four days before the company arrived in Nantes, these bills were pasted outside the Theatre Feydau and elsewhere around the town. Such announcements were still unusual at the time, and they attracted considerable attention. He had entrusted the task to Basque, an intelligent young man who was one of the company's newest recruits, and he sent him ahead of the troupe for this purpose.

You can see one of these playbills for yourself in the Carnavalet Museum. It lists the players by their stage names only, with the exception of Monsieur Binet and his daughter. By ignoring the fact that the actor who plays Trivelin in one piece appears as Tabarin in another, the bill makes the company seem at least half as large again as it really was. It announces that they will open with "The Rogueries of Scaramouche". This would be followed by five other plays whose titles are provided, and by other unnamed plays that would be added if the patronage in the distinguished and enlightened city of Nantes encouraged the Binet Troupe to prolong its stay at the Theatre Feydau. The bill places great stress on the fact that this is a company of improvisers in the old Italian manner, the likes of which had not been seen in France for half a century. It exhorts the public of Nantes not to miss this opportunity to witness these distinguished mimes who are reviving the glories of the Comédie de l'Art. The announcement proceeds to state that their visit to Nantes is preliminary to a visit to Paris. There, they intend to throw down the gauntlet to the actors of the Comédie-Française. They plan to show the world how the art of the improviser is superior to that of the actor who depends on an author for his lines and who consequently says the exact same thing every time he plays in the same piece.

It was an audacious bill, and its audacity had scared Monsieur Binet out of the little sense left to him by the Burgundy which he could afford to abuse in these days. He had offered the most vehement opposition. André-Louis had swept part of this aside and disregarded the rest.

"I admit that it is audacious," said Scaramouche. "But at your time of life you should have learned that nothing succeeds like audacity in this world."

"I forbid it. I absolutely forbid it," Monsieur Binet insisted.

"I knew you would. Just as I know that you will be very grateful to me presently for not obeying you."

"You are inviting a catastrophe."

"I am inviting fortune. The worst catastrophe that can overtake you is to be back in the market halls of the country villages from which I rescued you. I will have you in Paris yet in spite of yourself. Leave this to me."

He went out to attend to the printing. His preparations did not end there. He wrote a piquant article on the glories of the Comédie de l'Art and its resurrection by the improvising troupe of the great mime Florimond Binet. Binet's name was not Florimond. It was just Pierre. But André-Louis had a great sense of the theatre. That article was an amplification of the stimulating material contained in the playbills. He persuaded Basque, who had relations in Nantes, to use all the influence he could command and all the bribery they could afford to get that article printed in the "Courrier Nantais" a couple of days before the arrival of the Binet Troupe.

Basque had succeeded. This is not at all surprising considering the undoubted literary merits and intrinsic interest of the article.

And so Binet and his company descended upon an already expectant city in that first week of February. Monsieur Binet would have made his entrance in the usual manner with a full-dress parade, banging drums, and crashing cymbals. But André-Louis offered the most relentless opposition to this.

"We would only reveal our poverty," he said. "Instead, we will creep into the city unobserved and leave ourselves to the imagination of the public."

He had his way, of course. Monsieur Binet was already worn out from battling against the strong waters of this young man's will. He was completely unequal to the contest now that he found Climène in alliance with Scaramouche. She added her insistence to his and joined him in criticizing her father's sluggish and reactionary wits. Metaphorically, Monsieur Binet threw up his arms. He cursed the day he had taken this young man into his troupe, and he allowed the current to carry him wherever it would. He was persuaded that he would drown in the end. Meanwhile, he would drown his vexation in Burgundy. At least there was an abundance of Burgundy. He had never found Burgundy so plentiful in his life. Perhaps things were not as bad as he imagined after all. He reflected that, when all was said and done, he had to thank Scaramouche for the Burgundy. He would hope for the best while fearing the worst.

It was very much the worst that he feared as he waited in the wings when the curtain rose on their first performance at the Theatre Feydau. The house was tolerably filled by a public whose curiosity had been thoroughly stimulated by the preliminary announcements.

Although the scenario of "The Rogueries of Scaramouche" has not apparently survived, we know from the "Confessions" of André-Louis that it opens with Polichinelle in the character of an arrogant and fiercely jealous lover. He is shown in the act of beguiling the waiting-maid, Columbine, to play the spy upon her mistress, Climène. He begins with cajolery, but he fails in this with the saucy Columbine. She prefers cajolers to be at least attractive and to pay due deference to her own very piquant charms. The fierce humpbacked scoundrel passes on to threats of the terrible vengeance he will wreak upon her if she betrays him or neglects to obey him implicitly. He fails here as well, and he finally has recourse to bribery. After he bleeds himself freely to the expectant Columbine, he succeeds by these means in obtaining her consent to spy upon Climène and to report to him on her lady's conduct.

The pair played the scene well together. They were perhaps stimulated by their very nervousness at finding themselves before such an imposing audience. Polichinelle was everything that is fierce, contemptuous, and insistent. Columbine was the essence of pert indifference under his cajolery. She was saucily mocking under his threats, and she was finely sly in extorting the absolute maximum when it came to accepting a bribe. Laughter rippled through the audience and promised well. But Monsieur Binet, standing and trembling in the wings, missed the great guffaws of the rustic spectators to whom they had played previously, and his fears steadily mounted.

Then, Scaramouche bounds in through the window scarcely after Polichinelle departs through the door. It was an effective entrance, and it was usually performed with a broad comic effect that set the people in a roar. This was not the case on this occasion. Scaramouche had meditated in bed that morning and decided to present himself in a totally different aspect. He would cut out all the broad play and the usual clowning that had delighted their past rude audiences. He would obtain his effects by subtlety instead. He would present a slyly humorous rogue. He would be restrained and possess a certain dignity, wearing a countenance of complete solemnity. He would speak his lines dryly, as if he were unconscious of the humor with which he intended to invest them. Though it might take the audience longer to understand and discover him, they would like him all the better in the end.

True to that resolve, he now played his part as the friend and hired ally of the lovesick Leander. He came on his behalf for news of Climène, seizing the opportunity to further his own affair with Columbine and his designs upon the money-bags of Pantaloon. He had also taken certain liberties with the traditional costume of Scaramouche. He had caused the black doublet and breeches to be slashed with red, and the doublet to be cut more to a peak in the style of Henry III. He replaced the conventional black velvet cap with a conical hat that had a turned-up brim and a tuft of feathers on the left, and he discarded the guitar.

Monsieur Binet listened desperately for the roar of laughter that usually greeted the entrance of Scaramouche, and his dismay increased when it did not come. He then became conscious of something alarmingly unusual in Scaramouche's manner. The sibilant foreign accent was there, but none of the broad boisterousness their audiences had loved.

He wrung his hands in despair. "It is all over," he said. "The fellow has ruined us. It serves me right for being a fool and allowing him to take control of everything."

He was profoundly mistaken. He began to have an inkling of this when he took the stage himself presently and found the public attentive. He remarked a grin of quiet appreciation on every upturned face. However, it was not until the thunders of applause greeted the fall of the curtain on the first act that he felt quite sure they would be allowed to escape with their lives.

Had the part of Pantaloon in "The Rogueries" been anything other than that of a blundering and timid old idiot, Binet would have ruined it by his apprehensions. As it was, those very apprehensions magnified the hesitancy and bewilderment that were the essence of his part, and they contributed to the success. It proved to be a success that more than justified all the heralding of which Scaramouche had been guilty.

This success was not confined to the public for Scaramouche himself. A great reception awaited him from his companions assembled in the green room of the theatre at the end of the play. His talent, resourcefulness, and energy had raised them in a few weeks from a pack of vagrant mountebanks to a self-respecting company of first-rate players. They acknowledged it generously in a speech entrusted to Polichinelle. They added the tribute to his genius that they would conquer the world under his guidance, just as they had conquered Nantes.

In their enthusiasm, they were a little neglectful of the feelings of Monsieur Binet. He had already been irritated enough by the overriding of his every wish and by the consciousness of his weakness when opposed to Scaramouche. He had suffered the gradual process of usurpation of authority because its every step had been attended by his own greater profit. However, resentment lived deep down inside him and stifled every spark of the gratitude he owed to his partner. His nerves had been on the rack tonight, and he had suffered agonies of apprehension. He blamed Scaramouche so bitterly for all of this that not even the ultimate success, which was almost miraculous when all the elements are considered, could justify his partner in his eyes.

Now, he found himself additionally ignored by this company. It was his own company, which he had laboriously and slowly assembled and selected among the men of ability whom he had found here and there in the dregs of cities. This was something that stirred his bile and aroused the malevolence that never did more than slumber inside him. Deeply though his rage was moved, it did not blind him to the folly of betraying it. It was imperative that he assert himself in this hour, unless he were forever to become a thing of no account in this troupe. He had lorded over it for long months before this interloper came among them to fill his purse and destroy his authority.

He stepped forward now when Polichinelle finished speaking. His makeup assisted him in masking his bitter feelings, and he professed to add his own acclamations of his dear partner to those of Polichinelle. He did it in such a manner as to make it clear that whatever Scaramouche had done, he had done by Monsieur Binet's favor. It seemed that Monsieur Binet's had been the guiding hand in all of it. In associating himself with Polichinelle, he desired to thank Scaramouche much in the manner of a lord rendering thanks to his steward for services diligently rendered and orders scrupulously carried out.

It neither deceived the troupe nor mollified himself. Indeed, his consciousness of the mockery of it only increased his bitterness. But at least it saved his face and rescued him from nullity, since he was their chief.

To say that it did not deceive them is perhaps to say too much, for it deceived them at least on the score of his feelings. After discounting the insinuations in which he took all credit to himself, they believed that he was filled with gratitude at heart, just as they were. That belief was shared by André-Louis himself. In his brief and grateful answer, he was very generous to Monsieur Binet, more than endorsing the claims that Monsieur Binet had made.

Then followed the announcement from him that their success in Nantes was even sweeter to him because it rendered the dearest wish of his heart almost immediately attainable. This wish was to make Climène his wife. It was a felicity of which he was the first to acknowledge his utter unworthiness. It would bring him into still closer relations with his good friend Monsieur Binet, to whom he owed all that he had achieved for himself and for them. The announcement was joyously received, for the world of the theatre loves a lover as dearly as the greater world does. They acclaimed the happy pair, with the exception of poor Leander, whose eyes were more melancholy than ever.

They were a happy family that night in the upstairs room of their inn on the Quai de la Fosse. It was the same inn from which André-Louis had set out some weeks ago to play a vastly different role before an audience in Nantes. He wondered if it was really so different. Had he not been a sort of Scaramouche then? He had been an intriguer, glib and specious, deceiving people and cynically misleading them with opinions that were not really his own. Was it at all surprising that he should have made so rapid and signal a success as a mime? Was this not really all that he had ever been, the very thing for which Nature had designed him?

They played "The Shy Lover" to a full house on the following night. The fame of their debut had gone abroad, and the success of Monday was confirmed. On Wednesday they gave "Figaro-Scaramouche". On Thursday morning the "Courrier Nantais" came out with an article of more than a column praising these brilliant improvisers. It claimed that they utterly put to shame the mere reciters of memorized parts.

André-Louis laughed inwardly as he read the sheet at breakfast, having no delusions about the falseness of that statement. The novelty of the thing, and the pretentiousness in which he had wrapped it, had deceived them finely. He turned to greet Binet and Climène as they entered at that moment, and he waved the sheet above his head.

"It is settled," he announced. "We stay in Nantes until Easter."

"Do we?" said Binet sourly. "You settle everything, my friend."

"Read for yourself." He handed him the paper.

Monsieur Binet read it moodily. He set the sheet down in silence and turned his attention to his breakfast.

"Was I justified or not?" asked André-Louis, who found Monsieur Binet's behavior a bit intriguing.

"In what?"

"In coming to Nantes?"

"If I had not thought so, we would not have come," said Binet, and he began to eat.

André-Louis dropped the subject, wondering.

After breakfast, he and Climène sallied forth to take the air upon the quays. It was a day of brilliant sunshine and less cold than it had been lately. Columbine tactlessly joined them as they were setting out, though matters were improved a little in this respect when Harlequin came running after them and attached himself to Columbine.

André-Louis stepped out ahead with Climène and spoke of the thing that was uppermost in his mind at the moment.

"Your father is behaving very oddly towards me," he said. "It is almost as if he had suddenly become hostile."

"You are imagining it," she said. "My father is very grateful to you, as we all are."

"He is anything but grateful. He is infuriated with me, and I think I know the reason. Don't you? Can't you guess?"

"I really can't."

"If you were my daughter, Climène, which God be thanked you are not, I would feel aggrieved against the man who carried you away from me. Poor old Pantaloon! He called me a corsair when I told him that I intended to marry you."

"He was right. You are a bold robber, Scaramouche."

"It is in the character," he said. "Your father believes in having his mimes play the parts upon the stage that suit their natural temperaments."

"Yes, you take everything you want, don't you?" She looked up at him, half adoringly and half shyly.

"If it is possible," he said. "I took his consent to our marriage from him by main force. I never waited for him to give it. In fact, when he refused it, I simply snatched it from him, and I will defy him now to win it back from me. I think that is what he most resents."

She laughed and launched into an animated answer. But he did not hear a word of it. A cabriolet approached them through the bustle of traffic on the quay. The upper half of it was made almost entirely of glass. It was drawn by two magnificent bay horses and driven by a superbly liveried coachman.

A slight young girl sat alone in the cabriolet, wrapped in a lynx-fur pelisse, and her face was of delicate loveliness. She was leaning forward with her lips parted, and her eyes devoured Scaramouche until they drew his gaze. When that happened, the shock of it brought him abruptly to a dumbfounded halt.

Climène checked in the middle of a sentence. Arrested by his sudden stopping, she plucked at his sleeve.

"What is it, Scaramouche?"

He made no attempt to answer her. At that moment, the coachman, to whom the little lady had already signaled, brought the carriage to a standstill beside them. Seen in the gorgeous setting of that coach with its escutcheoned panels, its portly coachman, and its white-stockinged footman who swung instantly to earth as the vehicle stopped, its dainty occupant seemed to Climène like a princess out of a fairy tale. This princess leaned forward with glowing eyes and flushed cheeks, stretching out a choicely gloved hand to Scaramouche.

"André-Louis!" she called him.

Scaramouche took the hand of that exalted being, just as he might have taken the hand of Climène herself. With eyes that reflected the gladness of her own, and in a voice that echoed her joyous surprise, he addressed her familiarly by name, just as she had addressed him.

"Aline!"
