[Chapter 3: THE COMIC MUSE]

The company's entrance into the town of Guichen wasn't the grand triumph Binet had wished for. But it was startling and noisy enough to make the villagers stare in amazement. To them, these fantastic creatures appeared to be, and indeed were, beings from another world.

First came the large traveling carriage, pulled by two Flemish horses. It creaked and groaned as it moved. Pantaloon drove it. He was obese and massive, wearing a tight scarlet suit under a long brown dressing gown. His face was adorned with a colossal cardboard nose. Beside him, on the driver's seat, sat Pierrot. He wore a white smock with sleeves that completely covered his hands, loose white trousers, and a black skullcap. His face was whitened with flour, and he made hideous noises with a trumpet.

Polichinelle, Scaramouche, Harlequin, and Pasquariel were all on the coach roof. Polichinelle, dressed in black and white, wore a doublet cut in a century-old style, with humps front and back. He had a white frill around his neck and a black mask covering the upper half of his face. Standing in the middle, feet wide apart for balance, he solemnly and viciously banged a big drum. The other three sat at each corner of the roof, their legs dangling over the sides. Scaramouche, dressed entirely in black in the 17th-century Spanish style, had a pair of mustachios on his face. He jangled a guitar discordantly. Harlequin was ragged and patched in every color of the rainbow, with a leather belt and a wooden sword. The upper half of his face was smeared with soot, and he clashed a pair of cymbals intermittently. Pasquariel, dressed as an apothecary in a skullcap and white apron, made the onlookers laugh with his enormous tin clyster. When pumped, it emitted a mournful squeak.

Inside the carriage, the three ladies of the company sat, showing themselves freely at the windows and exchanging jokes with the townsfolk. Climene, the amoureuse, wore a beautiful gown of flowered satin. Her own curly hair was hidden under a pumpkin-shaped wig. She looked so much like a lady of fashion that you might have wondered what she was doing among that fantastic crowd. Madame, playing the mother, was also dressed splendidly, but her attire was exaggerated to be ridiculous. Her headdress was a monstrous creation, adorned with flowers and topped with small ostrich plumes. Columbine sat facing them, her back to the horses. She looked falsely demure in a white muslin milkmaid bonnet and a striped green and blue gown.

It was a marvel that the old carriage, which in its prime might have carried a Church dignitary, didn't collapse. Instead, it merely groaned under its excessive and boisterous load.

Next came the house on wheels, led by the tall, thin Rhodomont. He had daubed his face red and made himself even more terrifying with a pair of formidable mustachios. He wore long thigh-boots and a leather jerkin, an enormous sword trailing from a crimson baldric. He wore a broad felt hat with a bedraggled feather. As he advanced, he raised his booming voice and roared out defiance, threatening blood-curdling butchery for everyone. Leandre sat alone on the roof of this vehicle. He was dressed in blue satin, with ruffles, a small sword, powdered hair, beauty patches, a spyglass, and red-heeled shoes. He looked like a complete courtier, very handsome. The women of Guichen flirtatiously ogled him. He accepted their ogling as a fitting tribute to his good looks and returned it with interest. Like Climene, he looked out of place among the bandits who made up the rest of the company.

André-Louis brought up the rear, leading the two donkeys that pulled the property cart. He had insisted on wearing a false nose, claiming it was for embellishment, but really intending it as a disguise. Otherwise, he had kept his own clothes. No one paid any attention to him as he trudged along beside his donkeys. He was an insignificant rear guard, and he was perfectly content to be so.

They toured the town, where activity was already busier than usual in preparation for next week's fair. At intervals, they halted. The noise would stop abruptly, and Polichinelle would announce in a booming voice that at five o'clock that evening, in the old market, Monsieur Binet's famous company of improvisers would perform a new four-act comedy titled, "The Heartless Father."

Finally, they arrived at the old market. It was the ground floor of the town hall, open to the elements with two archways along each long side and one archway on each short side. All but two of these archways had been boarded up. These two remaining archways would soon be the entrance to the theater. Through them, the town's ragamuffins and the stingy people, who were unwilling to spend the necessary sous for proper admission, might catch furtive glimpses of the performance.

That afternoon was the most strenuous of André-Louis' life. He was unaccustomed to any kind of manual labor. He spent it erecting and preparing the stage at one end of the market hall. He began to realize how hard he would have to work for his monthly fifteen livres. At first, four of them worked on the task, or really three, since Pantaloon only shouted directions. Stripped of their costumes, Rhodomont and Leandre helped André-Louis with the carpentry. Meanwhile, the other four were at dinner with the ladies. About half an hour later, when they returned to continue the work, André-Louis and his companions went to dine. They left Polichinelle to direct and assist in the operations.

They crossed the square to the cheap little inn where they were staying. In the narrow passage, André-Louis came face to face with Climene. She had shed her elaborate costume and was now back to her normal appearance.

She asked him pertly, "And how do you like it?"

He looked her in the eyes. "It has its compensations," he said, in that curious cold tone of his. It left one wondering whether he truly meant what he seemed to mean.

She knit her brows. "You... you feel the need for compensations already?"

"Faith, I felt it from the beginning," he said. "It was the thought of them that attracted me."

They were quite alone. The others had gone into the room set apart for them, where food was spread. André-Louis, who knew as little about women as he knew much about men, didn't realize that his sudden, extraordinary awareness of her femininity was subtly, imperceptibly, caused by her.

She asked him with demure innocence, "What are these compensations?"

He caught himself just before he said too much.

"Fifteen livres a month," he said abruptly.

For a moment, she stared at him, bewildered. He was very disconcerting. Then she recovered.

"Oh, and bed and board," she said. "Don't leave that out of the calculation, as you seem to be doing. Your dinner will be getting cold. Aren't you coming?"

"Haven't you dined?" he cried. She wondered if she had caught a note of eagerness in his voice.

"No," she answered over her shoulder. "I waited."

"What for?" he asked innocently, hopefully.

"I had to change, of course, you fool," she answered rudely. She imagined she had dragged him to the chopping block, and she couldn't resist taking a jab. But he was one of those who always jabbed back.

"And you left your manners upstairs with your grand-lady clothes, Mademoiselle. I understand."

A scarlet flush spread across her face. "You are very insolent," she said lamely.

"I've often been told so. But I don't believe it." He thrust open the door for her. He bowed with an air that impressed her, even though it was merely copied from Fleury of the Comédie Française, a theater he had often visited in the days of Louis le Grand. He waved her in. "After you, ma demoiselle." For greater emphasis, he deliberately broke the word into its two component parts.

“I thank you, monsieur,” she answered frostily, with a hint of a sneer, as much as her charming nature allowed. She went inside and didn't speak to him again during the meal. Instead, she gave an unusual and overwhelming amount of attention to the sighing Leandre. He was the poor fellow who couldn't play the lover convincingly with her on stage because he longed to be her lover in real life.

André-Louis ate his herrings and black bread with a good appetite nonetheless. It was poor food, but then, poor food was the usual experience for poor people during that winter of starvation. Since he had joined a company whose business wasn't doing well, he had to accept the difficulties of the situation with a philosophical attitude.

“Do you have a name?” Binet asked him once during that meal, during a pause in the conversation.

“It happens that I do,” he said. “I think it is Parvissimus.”

“Parvissimus?” Binet asked. “Is that a family name?”

“In such a company, where only the leader enjoys the privilege of a family name, such a thing would be inappropriate for its least important member. So I take the name that suits me best. And I think it is Parvissimus, which means 'the very least'.”

Binet was amused. It was amusing; it showed quick wit. Oh, certainly, they had to start working on those scenarios together.

“I'll prefer that to carpentry,” André-Louis said. Nevertheless, he had to go back to it that afternoon and work strenuously until four o'clock. At last, the autocratic Binet declared himself satisfied with the preparations. He then proceeded, again with André-Louis's help, to prepare the lights, which were supplied partly by tallow candles and partly by lamps that burned fish-oil.

At five o'clock that evening, the three knocks were sounded, and the curtain rose on “The Heartless Father.”

Among the duties André-Louis inherited from Felicien, who had left and whom he replaced, was that of doorkeeper. He performed this duty dressed in a Polichinelle costume and wearing a pasteboard nose. It was an arrangement mutually agreeable to M. Binet and himself. M. Binet had taken the further precaution of keeping André-Louis's own clothes. This protected him against the risk of his latest recruit running off with the money. André-Louis had no illusions about Pantaloon's real motive. He agreed to it willingly enough, since it protected him from being recognized by any acquaintance who might happen to be in Guichen.

The performance was completely unexciting; the audience was small and unenthusiastic. The benches in the front half of the market held about twenty-seven people: eleven paid twenty sous each, and sixteen paid twelve. Behind these, a crowd of about thirty others stood, paying six sous each. So, the total earnings were two louis, ten livres, and two sous. By the time M. Binet had paid for the use of the market, his lights, and his company's expenses at the inn over Sunday, there was not likely to be much left over for his players' wages. It is not surprising, therefore, that M. Binet's good humor was a little clouded that evening.

“And what do you think of it?” he asked André-Louis as they were walking back to the inn after the performance.

“Possibly it could have been worse; probably it could not,” he said.

In sheer amazement, M. Binet stopped in his tracks and turned to look at his companion.

“Huh!” he said. “Dieu de Dieu! But you are frank.”

“An unpopular form of service among fools, I know.”

“Well, I am not a fool,” said Binet.

“That is why I am frank. I pay you the compliment of assuming intelligence in you, M. Binet.”

“Oh, you do?” M. Binet asked. “And who the devil are you to assume anything? Your assumptions are presumptuous, sir.” With that, he fell silent and began the gloomy business of mentally tallying his accounts.

But at table over supper a half-hour later, he revived the topic.

“Our latest recruit, this excellent M. Parvissimus,” he announced, “has the impudence to tell me that possibly our comedy could have been worse, but that probably it could not.” He puffed out his great round cheeks, inviting a laugh at the expense of that foolish critic.

“That’s bad,” the swarthy and sardonic Polichinelle said. He was as solemn as Rhadamanthus pronouncing judgment. “That’s bad. But what’s infinitely worse is that the audience had the nerve to agree with him.”

“An ignorant pack of clods,” Leandre sneered, tossing his handsome head.

“You are wrong,” Harlequin said. “You were born for love, my dear, not criticism.”

Leandre, a dull fellow as you might imagine, looked contemptuously down upon the little man. “And you, what were you born for?” he asked.

“Nobody knows,” he admitted candidly. “Nor do we know why. That’s true for many of us, my dear, believe me.”

“But why,” M. Binet interrupted, spoiling the start of a very pretty quarrel, “why do you say that Leandre is wrong?”

“Generally speaking, because he is always wrong. More specifically, because I judge the audience of Guichen to be too sophisticated for ‘The Heartless Father.’”

“You would put it more happily,” André-Louis, who had caused this discussion, interposed, “if you said that ‘The Heartless Father’ is too unsophisticated for the audience of Guichen.”

“Why, what’s the difference?” asked Leandre.

"I didn't mean there was a difference. I just suggested it's a better way to put it."

Binet sneered, "The gentleman is being clever."

"Why better?" Harlequin demanded.

"Because it's easier to adapt 'The Heartless Father' for the refined taste of the Guichen audience, than to bring the Guichen audience to the lack of refinement in 'The Heartless Father.'"

Polichinelle groaned, "Let me think it out." He then took his head in his hands.

But from the end of the table, Climene challenged André-Louis. She sat between Columbine and Madame.

"You would alter the comedy, wouldn't you, Monsieur Parvissimus?" she cried.

He turned to deflect her jab.

"I would suggest that it be altered," he corrected, nodding slightly.

"And how would you alter it, monsieur?"

"Me? Oh, for the better."

"But of course!" Her voice was pure sarcasm. "And how would you do it?"

"Yes, tell us that," roared Monsieur Binet. He added, "Silence, please, gentlemen and ladies. Silence for Monsieur Parvissimus."

André-Louis looked from father to daughter and smiled. "Indeed!" he said. "I'm between a club and a knife here. If I escape with my life, I'll be fortunate. Well then, since you've cornered me like this, I'll tell you what I would do. I would go back to the original and borrow more freely from it."

"The original?" questioned Monsieur Binet, the author.

"It's called, I believe, 'Monsieur de Pourceaugnac,' and it was written by Moliere."

Someone giggled, but it wasn't Monsieur Binet. He had been hit a nerve, and the look in his little eyes betrayed that his friendly exterior hid anything but a friendly nature.

"You accuse me of plagiarism," he said at last. "Of stealing Moliere's ideas."

"There's always, of course," said André-Louis, completely calm, "the other possibility: two great minds having similar ideas independently."

Monsieur Binet studied the young man attentively for a moment. He found him calm and unreadable. He decided to force him to be specific.

"Then you're not implying that I've been stealing from Moliere?"

"I advise you to do so, monsieur," came the unsettling reply.

Monsieur Binet was shocked.

"You advise me to do so! You advise me, Antoine Binet, to become a thief at my age!"

"He is outrageous," mademoiselle said indignantly.

"Outrageous is the word. I thank you for it, my dear. I trusted you, sir. You sit at my table. You have the honor to be included in my company. And to my face, you have the audacity to advise me to become a thief. The worst kind of thief imaginable: a thief of intellectual property, a thief of ideas! It is unbearable, unacceptable! I fear I have been gravely mistaken about you, monsieur, just as you appear to have been mistaken about me. I am not the scoundrel you take me for, sir. And I will not include in my company a man who dares to suggest that I should become one. Outrageous!"

He was very angry. His voice boomed through the little room. The company sat hushed and a little scared, their eyes on André-Louis. He was the only one completely unfazed by this outburst of righteous anger.

"You realize, monsieur," he said very quietly, "that you are insulting the memory of the illustrious dead?"

"Eh?" said Binet.

André-Louis began to elaborate on his clever arguments.

"You insult the memory of Moliere," André-Louis said, "the greatest figure of our stage, one of the greatest glories of our nation. You suggest there's anything shameful in doing what he never hesitated to do, what no great author has ever hesitated to do. You can't possibly think Moliere ever bothered to be original with his ideas. You can't imagine that the stories he tells in his plays had never been told before. They were taken, as you very well know, though you seem to have forgotten it for a moment, and so I must remind you. Many of them were taken from Italian authors, who themselves had taken them from who knows where. Moliere took those old stories and retold them in his own language. That is exactly what I'm suggesting you should do. Your company is a company of improvisers. You supply the dialogue as you go, which is actually more than Moliere ever even tried. You may, if you prefer, though it seems to me like being overly scrupulous, go straight to Boccaccio or Sacchetti. But even then, you can't be sure you've reached the original sources."

André-Louis won the argument decisively after that. You can see what a skilled debater he was, how clever he was at making white seem black. The company was impressed, especially Monsieur Binet. He now had a crushing argument against anyone who might, in the future, accuse him of the shameless plagiarisms he undoubtedly committed. He backed down as gracefully as possible from his initial stance.

"So you think," he said, after a long speech agreeing with André-Louis, "you think that our story of 'The Heartless Father' could be enriched by drawing from 'Monsieur de Pourceaugnac'? I confess, on reflection, that it might have some superficial similarities."

"I do," André-Louis replied. "I most certainly do, provided you do so judiciously. Times have changed since Moliere." As a result of this conversation, Binet left soon after, taking André-Louis with him. The pair sat together late that night and were again deep in conversation throughout the whole of Sunday morning.

After dinner, Monsieur Binet read to the assembled company the revised and expanded outline of "The Heartless Father." He had taken great care to prepare it, acting on the advice of Monsieur Parvissimus. The company had few doubts about the real author before he started reading, and absolutely none once he finished. There was a certain energy, a captivating quality to this story. What's more, those who knew their Moliere realized that this outline, far from being closer to the original, had actually moved further away from it. Moliere's original part, the title role, had shrunk into insignificance, much to the disgust of Polichinelle, who was assigned the role. But the other parts had all been developed into significant roles, with the exception of Leander, who remained as before. The two great roles were now Scaramouche, playing the intriguing Sbrigandini, and Pantaloon the father. There was also a comical part for Rhodomont, as the roaring bully hired by Polichinelle to beat Leander to a pulp. Given Scaramouche's new importance, the play had been renamed "Figaro-Scaramouche."

This last change had met with considerable opposition from Monsieur Binet. But his relentless collaborator, who was actually the real author, had overruled him. André-Louis was shamelessly, but finally practically, drawing upon his vast store of reading.

"You must keep up with the times, monsieur," André-Louis insisted. "In Paris, Beaumarchais is all the rage. 'Figaro' is known worldwide today. Let's borrow a little of his glory. It will attract people. They will come to see half a 'Figaro' when they wouldn't come to see a dozen 'Heartless Fathers.' Therefore, let's bestow the mantle of Figaro upon someone and announce it in our title."

"But as I am the head of the company..." Monsieur Binet began, feebly.

"If you ignore your own interests," André-Louis retorted, "you will soon be a head without a body. And what good is that? Can Pantaloon's shoulders carry the mantle of Figaro? You laugh. Of course you laugh. The idea is absurd. The right person for the mantle of Figaro is Scaramouche, who is, naturally, Figaro's twin brother."

Tyrannized in this way, the tyrannical Binet gave in. He was comforted by the thought that if he understood anything about the theatre, he had, for fifteen livres a month, acquired something that would soon be earning him as many louis.

The company's reception of the outline now confirmed his belief, except for Polichinelle. Annoyed that he had lost half his part due to the changes, Polichinelle declared the new script foolish.

"Ah! You call my work foolish, do you?" Monsieur Binet demanded loudly.

"Your work?" Polichinelle said, adding sarcastically, "Ah, pardon me. I hadn't realized that you were the author."

"Then realize it now."

"You were very chummy with Monsieur Parvissimus about this authorship," Polichinelle said, with shameless insinuation.

"And what if I was?" Binet snapped. "What are you implying?"

"That you took him to do your writing for you, of course."

"I'll cut your ears for you if you're not civil!" the infuriated Binet stormed.

Polichinelle got up slowly and stretched himself.

"Good heavens!" he said. "If Pantaloon is to play Rhodomont, I think I'll leave you. He is not amusing in the part." And he strode out before Monsieur Binet had recovered from being speechless.
