[Book 2 - Chapter 5: Enter Scaramouche]

Chapter 5. Enter Scaramouche

He was dressed in the close-fitting black suit of a past age. The suit included a flat velvet cap and shoes with rosettes. His face was whitened, and a slight curled moustache was glued to his upper lip. A small-sword hung at his side, and he had a guitar slung across his back. Scaramouche surveyed himself in a mirror. He felt quite sardonic, which was the perfect mood for his new part.

He reflected on his life. Until recently, his life had been stagnant and contemplative. But it had suddenly become incredibly active. In just one week, he had been a lawyer, a mob orator, an outlaw, a property man, and finally a buffoon. Last Wednesday, he had riled up an audience in Rennes to anger. On this Wednesday, he was going to make an audience in Guichen laugh. Back then, he wanted to draw tears. Today, his job was to provoke laughter. There was a difference, but there was also a parallel. He had been a comedian then, just as he was now. When he thought about it, his role in Rennes was very similar to the part he would play this evening. In Rennes, he had acted like a sort of Scaramouche. He had been the little skirmisher and the clever intriguer who secretly scattered the seeds of trouble. The only difference was his name. Today, he used a name that openly described his character type. Last week, he had disguised himself as a respectable young provincial attorney.

He bowed to his reflection in the mirror.

"Buffoon!" he told his reflection. "At last you have found yourself. At last you have come into your true heritage. You should be a great success."

He heard Monsieur Binet call his new name. He went downstairs to find the company gathered in the entrance corridor of the inn.

He was naturally an object of great interest to the entire company. Monsieur Binet and Mademoiselle Climene inspected him very critically. Monsieur Binet searched him with grave eyes, while Climene looked at him with a scornful curl of her lip.

"You will do," Monsieur Binet commended his makeup. "At least you look the part."

"Unfortunately, men are not always what they look," Climene said bitterly.

"That truth does not apply to me right now," André-Louis replied. "This is the first time in my life that I actually look like what I am."

Mademoiselle Climene curled her lip even more and turned her shoulder away from him. But the rest of the company thought he was very witty. They probably thought so because his meaning was a bit obscure. Columbine encouraged him with a friendly smile that showed her large white teeth. Monsieur Binet swore once again that André-Louis would be a great success, since he had thrown himself into the role with such spirit. Then, Monsieur Binet organized them for the short parade over to the market hall. He used a booming voice that sounded like he had borrowed it from the roaring captain.

The new Scaramouche took his place beside Rhodomont. The old Scaramouche had left an hour ago on his crutch. He went to take the job of doorkeeper, which André-Louis had been forced to leave. So the two men had completely swapped their jobs.

Polichinelle banged his large drum, and Pierrot blew his trumpet to lead the way. They set out and marched past the local ragamuffins. These poor people had lined up to enjoy the free spectacle of the parade.

Ten minutes later, three knocks sounded. The curtains were drawn aside to reveal a battered stage set that looked like a mix between a garden and a forest. Climene was on stage, looking feverishly for Leander to arrive. The handsome, melancholy lover stood in the wings waiting for his cue. Right behind him stood the inexperienced Scaramouche, who was scheduled to follow him shortly.

André-Louis felt a sudden wave of nausea during that terrifying moment. He tried to do a quick mental review of the first act of the scenario. He was the main author of this play, but he found his mind completely blank. Sweat broke out on his skin, and he stepped back to the wall. A sheet of paper was pasted there above a dim lantern. It contained a brief outline of the play. He was still studying it when someone grabbed his arm and pulled him violently toward the wings. He caught a glimpse of Pantaloon's grotesque face and blazing eyes. He heard a harsh growl.

"Climene has spoken your cue three times already."

Before he realized what was happening, he was pushed onto the stage. He stood there looking foolish and blinking in the glare of the footlights, which were backed by tin reflectors. He looked so utterly foolish and confused that the audience roared with laughter. The hall was completely packed that evening. He trembled a little, and his confusion only grew at first. He stood there taking in the loud laughter aimed at his ridiculous appearance. Climene was watching him with expectant mockery. She was eager to see him humiliated. Leander looked at him in sheer panic, while Monsieur Binet was dancing with fury behind the scenes.

"Name of a name," Monsieur Binet groaned to the frightened actors backstage. "What will happen when they realize that he is not actually acting?"

But the audience never did figure it out. Scaramouche's bewildered paralysis only lasted for a few seconds. He realized they were laughing at him. He remembered that his character Scaramouche was supposed to be someone the audience laughed with, not at. He knew he had to save the situation and twist it to his advantage. His real confusion and fear vanished. He replaced them with acted confusion and fear, which were much more exaggerated but not quite as funny. He managed to make it look like he was terrified of someone off the stage. He hid behind a painted shrub. When the laughter finally began to die down, he spoke to Climene and Leander.

"Please forgive me, beautiful lady, if my sudden entrance startled you. The truth is, I have never been the same since my last encounter with Almaviva. My heart is not as strong as it used to be. Down there at the end of the lane, I bumped into an elderly gentleman carrying a heavy cudgel. The terrible thought struck me that he might be your father. I worried that someone had already betrayed our little plan to get you safely married. I think his large club put that idea in my head. Not that I am afraid. I am not really afraid of anything. But I could not help thinking that if he really was your father, he might have broken my head with his club. Then your hopes would have died with me. What would you two poor children have done without me?"

A ripple of laughter from the audience steadily encouraged him. It helped him recover his natural boldness. It was clear that the audience found him funny. They were about to find him much funnier than he ever intended. This was largely due to a lucky circumstance that he had not fully considered. He had been very afraid that someone from Gavrillac or Rennes might recognize him. His face makeup was heavy enough to hide his identity, but his voice was still a risk. To disguise his voice, he decided to use the fact that his character Figaro was Spanish. Back at the Louis le Grand school, he had known a Spanish student. This student spoke fluent but extremely strange French with an absurd amount of hissing sounds. André-Louis had often imitated that accent, just as young boys mock traits they find funny. Luckily, he remembered that Spanish student and based his stage voice on that accent tonight. The audience in Guichen found his accent just as hilarious as he and his classmates had found the real Spaniard's voice years ago.

Meanwhile, Monsieur Binet listened to this smooth, improvised speech from backstage. The script gave no hint of these lines, but Binet had recovered from his panic.

"God of God!" he whispered with a grin. "Did he do all of that on purpose?"

He thought it was impossible for a man who looked so terrified to recover his wits so quickly and completely. Yet, the doubt remained in Binet's mind.

He decided to find out after the curtain fell on the first act. The act had been performed with an energy that the company had never seen before. The success of the act rested almost entirely on the slim shoulders of the new Scaramouche. Monsieur Binet questioned him bluntly to resolve his doubt.

They were standing in the small space that served as a green room. The whole company gathered there to shower their new recruit with congratulations. Scaramouche felt a little thrilled by his success right then, even if he might think it was silly tomorrow. He took full revenge on Climene for the malicious pleasure she had shown during his moment of real panic.

"I am not surprised that you ask," he said. "Honestly, I should have warned you that I planned to do my best to put the audience in a good mood from the very start. Mademoiselle Climene very nearly ruined the whole thing by refusing to react to my fear. She did not even look startled. Next time, mademoiselle, I will give you full warning of everything I intend to do."

Her face turned crimson under her greasepaint. Before she could think of a sufficiently venomous reply, her father scolded her harshly for her stupidity. He scolded her even harder because he had also been fooled by Scaramouche's brilliant acting.

Scaramouche's success in the first act grew even stronger as the play went on. He was completely in control of himself by now. He felt energized, the way only success can energize a person, and he warmed up to his performance. He was cheeky, quick, sly, and graceful. He became the perfect ideal of Scaramouche. He boosted his own natural wit by tossing in remembered lines from Beaumarchais. This convinced the more educated people in the crowd that they were seeing the real Figaro. It made them feel connected to the grand, sophisticated world of the capital city.

When the curtain finally fell for the last time, Scaramouche shared the evening's honors with Climene. His name was called out along with hers when the audience demanded they return to the stage.

They stepped back, and the curtains hid them from the leaving audience once again. Monsieur Binet walked up to them, rubbing his fat hands together softly. This runaway young lawyer had just stumbled into his company by chance. It seemed clear that Fate had sent him to make Binet's fortune. This sudden success at Guichen was unmatched in their history, and Binet planned to repeat and grow it in other towns. There would be no more sleeping under bushes or going hungry. Their hard times were over. He placed a hand on Scaramouche's shoulder. He smiled at him, and even his red paint and massive fake nose could not hide his oily expression.

"And what do you have to say to me now?" Binet asked him. "Was I wrong when I promised that you would succeed? Do you think I have spent my whole life in the theater without recognizing a born actor when I see one? You are my discovery, Scaramouche. I have helped you discover your true self. I have set your feet on the path to fame and fortune. I am waiting for your thanks."

Scaramouche laughed at him, and his laugh was not entirely friendly.

"You are always playing Pantaloon!" he said.

The large man's face darkened. "I see that you still have not forgiven me for the little trick I used to make you do your best. You ungrateful dog! You act as if I had any goal other than to make you a star, and I have done exactly that. Keep going the way you started, and you will end up in Paris. You might even perform at the Comédie-Française and rival great actors like Talma, Fleury, and Dugazon. When that happens, perhaps you will feel the gratitude you owe to old Binet. You will owe it all to this soft-hearted old fool."

"If you were as good an actor on the stage as you are in real life," Scaramouche said, "you would have made it to the Comédie-Française a long time ago yourself. But I hold no grudge against you, Monsieur Binet." He laughed and held out his hand.

Binet grabbed it and shook it warmly.

"Well, that is something, at least," he declared. "My boy, I have big plans for you and for all of us. Tomorrow, we go to Maure. There is a fair there until the end of this week. Then, on Monday, we will try our luck at Pipriac, and after that, we will decide our next step. I think I might be about to achieve my life's dream. We must have taken in over fifteen louis tonight. Where the devil is that rascal Cordemais?"

Cordemais was the name of the original Scaramouche, who had unfortunately twisted his ankle. Binet referred to him by his real name, which proved that the man had forever lost his high status as Scaramouche in the Binet company.

"Let us go find him, and then we will head back to the inn to open a bottle of the best Burgundy. We might even open two bottles."

But they could not find Cordemais easily. Nobody in the company had seen him since the play ended. Monsieur Binet went around to the entrance, but Cordemais was not there. At first, Binet was just annoyed. Then, as he kept yelling the man's name with no answer, he began to feel uneasy. Finally, Polichinelle, who was walking with them, found Cordemais's crutch lying abandoned behind the door. Monsieur Binet became truly frightened. A terrible suspicion popped into his mind, and he turned visibly pale beneath his stage paint.

"But he could not walk without his crutch this evening!" Binet exclaimed. "So how did he leave it here and walk away?"

"Maybe he went back to the inn," someone suggested.

"But he could not walk without his crutch," Monsieur Binet insisted again.

However, since Cordemais was clearly not anywhere near the market hall, they all walked back to the inn together. They bombarded the landlady with their loud questions.

"Oh, yes, Monsieur Cordemais came in a while ago."

"Where is he now?"

"He left again immediately. He just came to grab his bag."

"For his bag!" Binet was on the edge of having a stroke. "How long ago was that?"

She looked at the clock on the mantelpiece. "It was about half an hour ago. Just a few minutes before the diligence coach to Rennes passed through town."

"The Rennes diligence!" Monsieur Binet could barely speak. "Could he... could he walk?" he asked in a tone of utter dread.

"Walk? He ran like a hare when he left the inn. I actually thought his quickness was a bit suspicious, considering how badly he was limping after he fell down the stairs yesterday. Is something wrong?"

Monsieur Binet collapsed into a chair. He grabbed his head with both hands and groaned.

"That scoundrel was faking it the whole time!" Climene yelled. "His fall down the stairs was just a trick. He planned this. He has robbed us."

"Fifteen louis at least, maybe sixteen!" Monsieur Binet said. "Oh, that heartless criminal! To rob me, when I have treated him like a father. And to rob me at a moment like this."

The rest of the company stood in silent shock. They were all wondering how much money would be deducted from their own small paychecks to cover the loss. Then, someone sputtered with laughter.

Monsieur Binet glared at them with bloodshot eyes.

"Who is laughing?" he roared. "What heartless monster has the nerve to laugh at my misfortune?"

André-Louis stepped forward. He was still wearing the dark, grand costume of Scaramouche, and he was still laughing.

"So it is you, is it? You might change your tune, my friend, if I decide to take back my money in a way I know how."

"You dullard!" Scaramouche mocked him. "You rabbit-brained elephant! So what if Cordemais ran off with fifteen louis? Has he not left you something worth twenty times as much?"

Monsieur Binet stared at him, completely confused.

"I think you are stuck between two wines. You have been drinking," Binet concluded.

"Yes, I have. I have been drinking at the fountain of comedy. Oh, do you really not see it? Do you not see the treasure that Cordemais left behind?"

"What did he leave?"

"A unique idea for a brand new play. It is unfolding right in front of my eyes. I will borrow part of the title from Molière. We will call it 'The Deceits of Scaramouche.' If we don't leave the audiences in Maure and Pipriac with their sides hurting from laughter, I swear I will play the dullard Pantaloon from now on."

Polichinelle smacked his fist into his open palm. "Superb!" he said fiercely. "To pull fortune out of disaster, to turn a loss into a profit, that takes true genius."

Scaramouche offered a dramatic bow. "Polichinelle, you are a man after my own heart. I love someone who can recognize my talent. If Pantaloon had even half of your brains, we would be drinking Burgundy tonight despite Cordemais running away."

"Burgundy?" Monsieur Binet roared. Before he could say anything else, Harlequin clapped his hands together.

"That is the right spirit, Monsieur Binet! You heard him, landlady. He ordered Burgundy."

"I did not order any such thing."

"But you heard him, dear madame. We all heard him."

The rest of the actors chimed in and agreed. Meanwhile, Scaramouche smiled and patted Binet on the shoulder.

"Get up, man, and have a little courage. Did you not just say that fortune is waiting for us? Do we not have the power to seize that fortune right now? Let us have Burgundy, then. We will use it to toast to 'The Deceits of Scaramouche.'"

Monsieur Binet was not blind to the brilliant idea. He finally gave in, found his courage, and got drunk with the rest of them.
