CHAPTER 8. THE DREAM

Aline commanded her footman, "The door." Then, in the same breath, she told André-Louis, "Mount here beside me."

"A moment, Aline."

He turned to his companion, who was completely amazed. Harlequin and Columbine had just arrived to see it, too. "Do you mind, Climene?" he asked breathlessly. But it was more a statement than a question. "Fortunately, you're not alone. Harlequin will take care of you. See you at dinner."

He then sprang into the cabriolet without waiting for a reply. The footman closed the door. The coachman cracked his whip. The elegant carriage rolled away along the quay, leaving the three comedians staring after it, open-mouthed. Then Harlequin laughed.

"A prince in disguise, our Scaramouche!" he said.

Columbine clapped her hands and smiled broadly, showing her strong teeth. "But what a romance for you, Climene! How wonderful!"

Climene's frown disappeared. Resentment changed to bewilderment.

"But who is she?"

"His sister, of course," Harlequin said with certainty.

"His sister? How do you know?"

"I know what he will tell you when he returns."

"But why?"

"Because you wouldn't believe him if he said she was his mother."

They followed the carriage with their eyes. Then they continued walking in the direction it had gone. Inside the carriage, Aline was studying André-Louis. Her eyes were serious, her lips slightly pressed together, and a tiny frown creased her delicate eyebrows.

The first thing she said to him was, "You've started keeping strange company, André." She added, "Or else I'm mistaken in thinking your companion was Mademoiselle Binet from the Feydau Theatre."

"You are not mistaken. But I hadn't imagined Mademoiselle Binet was so famous already."

"Oh, about that..." She shrugged, her tone quietly scornful. She explained, "It's simply that I was at the play last night. I thought I recognized her."

"You were at the Feydau last night? And I never saw you!"

"Were you there, too?"

"Was I there indeed!" he cried. Then he paused and abruptly changed his tone. "Oh, yes, I was there," he said, as casually as he could. He felt a sudden reluctance to admit he had willingly stooped to something she would consider unworthy. He was also grateful that his disguise, both his face and voice, had been so effective, even to someone who knew him so well.

"I understand," she said, and pressed her lips together a little more tightly.

"But what do you understand?"

"Mademoiselle Binet's unique appeal. Naturally, you would be at the theatre. Your tone made that very clear. Do you know that you disappoint me, André? Perhaps it's foolish of me. I suppose it shows my limited understanding of your sex. I know that most fashionable young men are irresistibly drawn to women who perform on stage. But I didn't expect you to imitate the habits of a fashionable man. I was foolish enough to imagine you were different, rather above such trivial pursuits. I thought of you as something of an idealist."

"Sheer flattery."

"So I see. But you misled me. You spoke so much about a certain kind of morality. You philosophized so easily. That's why I was deceived. In fact, your hypocrisy was so complete that I never suspected it. With your acting talent, I'm surprised you haven't joined Mademoiselle Binet's troupe."

"I have," he said.

It had become necessary to tell her. He was choosing the lesser of the two evils she presented him with.

He saw incredulity first, then dismay, and finally disgust spread across her face.

After a long pause, she said, "Of course, that would have the advantage of bringing you closer to your charmer."

"That was only one of the inducements. There was another. I found myself forced to choose between the stage and the gallows. I had the incredible weakness to prefer the former. It was utterly unworthy of a man of my lofty ideals, but what was I to do? Like other idealists, I find it easier to preach than to practice. Shall I stop the carriage and remove my contaminating presence? Or shall I tell you how it happened?"

"Tell me how it happened first. Then we will decide."

He told her how he met the Binet Troupe. He explained how the men of the marechaussee made him realize that he could hide safely within the troupe until the search for him died down. The explanation dissolved her coldness.

"My poor André, why didn't you tell me this at first?"

"For one thing, you didn't give me time. For another, I feared to shock you with the sight of my degradation."

She took him seriously. "But where was the need for it? And why didn't you send us word, as I asked, about your whereabouts?"

"I was thinking of it only yesterday. I have hesitated for several reasons."

"You thought it would offend us to know what you were doing?"

"I think I preferred to surprise you with the greatness of my ultimate achievements."

"Oh, you are to become a great actor?" She was frankly scornful.

"That is not impossible. But I am more concerned with becoming a great author. There is no reason why you should scoff. The profession is an honorable one. All the world is proud to know men like Beaumarchais and Chénier."

"And you hope to equal them?"

"I hope to surpass them, while acknowledging that they were the ones who taught me how to walk. What did you think of the play last night?"

"It was amusing and well-conceived."

"Let me present you to the author."

"You? But the company is one of the improvisers."

"Even improvisers require an author to write their scenarios. That is all I write at present. Soon I shall be writing plays in the modern style."

"You deceive yourself, my poor André. The piece last night would have been nothing without the players. You are fortunate in your Scaramouche."

"In confidence, I present him to you."

"You? Scaramouche? You?" She turned to regard him fully. He smiled his close-lipped smile, which made wrinkles like gashes in his cheeks. He nodded. "And I didn't recognize you!"

"I thank you for the tribute. You imagined, of course, that I was a scene-shifter. And now that you know all about me, what about Gavrillac? What about my godfather?"

He was well, she told him. He was still profoundly indignant with André-Louis for his defection, while secretly concerned on his behalf.

"I shall write to him today that I have seen you."

"Do so. Tell him that I am well and prospering. But say no more. Do not tell him what I am doing. He has his prejudices too. Besides, it might not be prudent. And now, the question I have been desperate to ask ever since I entered your carriage: Why are you in Nantes, Aline?"

"I am on a visit to my aunt, Madame de Sautron. It was with her that I came to the play yesterday. We have been dull at the chateau, but it will be different now. My aunt is receiving several guests today. Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr is to be one of them."

André-Louis frowned and sighed. "Did you ever hear, Aline, how poor Philippe de Vilmorin met his end?"

"Yes, I was told. First by my uncle, then by Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr himself."

"Did that not help you decide this marriage question?"

"How could it? You forget that I am just a woman. You don't expect me to judge between men in matters such as these?"

"Why not? You're perfectly capable. Especially since you've heard both sides. My godfather would tell you the truth. If you can't judge, it's because you don't want to." His tone became harsh. "You deliberately ignore the justice that could stop your unhealthy, unnatural ambition."

"Excellent!" she exclaimed. She looked at him with amusement, and something more. "Do you know you're almost comical? You rise shamelessly from the lowest point in life where I find you, shake off that theater girl's arm, just to come and preach to me."

"Even if these were the lowest points of life, I might still speak from them to advise you, out of my respect and devotion, Aline." He was very stiff and stern. "But they are not the lowest points of life. Honor and virtue are possible for a theater girl. They are impossible for a lady who sells herself to satisfy ambition, who trades herself in marriage for position, riches, and a great title."

She looked at him breathlessly. Anger turned her pale. She reached for the cord.

"I think I'd better let you get out so you can go back to practice virtue and honor with your theater wench."

"You shall not speak so of her, Aline."

"Well, now we're getting heated on her behalf. Do you think I'm too delicate? Do you think I should speak of her as a..."

He interrupted hotly, "If you must speak of her at all, you'll speak of her as my wife."

Amazement overwhelmed her anger. She grew even paler. "My God!" she said, and looked at him in horror. A moment later, in horror, she asked him, "You are married? Married to that...?"

"Not yet. But I will be, soon. And let me tell you that this girl, whom you treat with your ignorant contempt, is as good and pure as you are, Aline. She has wit and talent which have placed her where she is and will carry her much farther. And she has the womanliness to be guided by natural instincts when choosing her partner."

She was trembling with passion. She tugged the cord.

"You will get out this instant!" she told him fiercely. "How dare you compare me to that..."

"And my wife-to-be," he interrupted, before she could speak the insulting word. He opened the door for himself without waiting for the footman, and leapt down. "My compliments," he said furiously, "to the assassin you are to marry." He slammed the door. "Drive on," he told the coachman.

The carriage rolled away up Faubourg Gigan, leaving him standing where he had gotten out, trembling with rage. Gradually, as he walked back to the inn, his anger cooled. As his anger cooled, he understood her point of view, and in the end, he forgave her. It wasn't her fault that she thought as she did. Her upbringing had taught her to see every actress as a prostitute, just as it had prepared her to calmly consider the monstrous marriage of convenience she was being offered.

He got back to the inn to find the company already eating. Silence fell when he entered, so suddenly that it was clear he had been the topic of conversation. Harlequin and Columbine had spread the tale of this prince in disguise, swept into a princess's carriage and carried away by her. It was a tale that had only grown more dramatic in the telling.

Climene had been silent and thoughtful, thinking about what Columbine had called this romance of hers. Clearly, her Scaramouche must be very different from how he had appeared until now. Otherwise, that great lady and he would never have been so familiar with each other. Climene, imagining him to be no better than he seemed, had made him her own. And now she was to receive the reward for her selfless affection.

Even old Binet's secret hostility toward André-Louis melted away before this astounding revelation. He had playfully pinched his daughter's ear. "Ah, ah, trust you to have seen through his disguise, my child!"

She shrank resentfully from that implication.

"But I did not. I took him for what he seemed."

Her father winked at her very seriously and laughed. "Of course, you did. But like your father, who was once a gentleman and knows how gentlemen behave, you detected in him a subtle difference from those misfortune has forced you to associate with until now. You knew as well as I did that he never picked up that haughty manner, that grand air of command, in a lawyer's dusty office. His speech hardly sounded like a commoner's, nor did his thoughts have the character of the bourgeois he pretended to be. And it was clever of you to have claimed him. Do you know that I will be very proud of you, Climene?"

She moved away without answering. Her father's fawning manner offended her. Scaramouche was clearly a great gentleman, an eccentric, perhaps, but a man of noble birth. And she was to be his lady. Her father must learn to treat her differently.

She looked shyly, with a new shyness, at her lover when he came into the room where they were dining. She observed for the first time that proud way he held his head, with his chin thrust forward, a habit of his. She noticed with what grace he moved. It was the grace of someone who, in youth, had had dancing masters and fencing masters.

It almost hurt her when he flung himself into a chair and exchanged a joke with Harlequin, treating him as an equal, in the usual manner. It offended her still more that Harlequin, knowing what he now knew, should treat him with the same inappropriate familiarity.
