CHAPTER 6. POLITICIANS

One August morning, Le Chapelier invaded the academy in the Rue du Hasard. He was accompanied by a man of remarkable appearance. His herculean stature and disfigured face seemed vaguely familiar to André-Louis. The man was just over thirty, with small, bright eyes set deep in an enormous face. His cheekbones were prominent, and his nose was crooked, as if it had been broken by a blow. Scars from another injury made his mouth almost shapeless. (A bull had gored him in the face when he was just a boy.) As if that weren't enough to make him look terrible, his cheeks were also deeply pock-marked. He was dressed untidily. He wore a long scarlet coat that reached almost to his ankles, soiled buckskin breeches, and boots with reversed tops. His shirt, not very clean, was open at the throat. The collar hung limply over an unknotted cravat, fully displaying the muscular neck that rose like a pillar from his massive shoulders. He swung a cane, almost a club, in his left hand. A cockade adorned his conical, biscuit-colored hat. He carried himself with an aggressive, masterful air, his great head thrown back as if he were constantly defiant.

Le Chapelier, looking very grave, introduced him to André-Louis.

“This is Monsieur Danton,” Le Chapelier said. “He’s a fellow lawyer and President of the Cordeliers, whom you’ve probably heard of.”

Of course, André-Louis had heard of him. By then, who hadn't?

André-Louis looked at him with interest. He wondered why all, or nearly all, the leading innovators were pock-marked. Mirabeau, the journalist Desmoulins, the philanthropist Marat, Robespierre, the little lawyer from Arras, this formidable fellow Danton, and several others he could recall, all bore the scars of smallpox. He almost began to wonder if there was any connection between the two. Did an attack of smallpox produce certain moral results that manifested this way?

He dismissed the idle speculation. Or rather, the startling thunder of Danton’s voice shattered it.

“This damn Chapelier has told me about you,” Danton boomed. “He says that you are a patriotic fellow.”

André-Louis was startled not just by the tone, but by the obscenities the Colossus didn't hesitate to pepper his first speech to a complete stranger with. He laughed outright. There was nothing else he could do.

“If he has told you that,” André-Louis replied, “he has told you more than the truth! I am a patriot. My modesty forces me to deny the rest.”

The other roared, “You’re a joker too, it seems!” He laughed nevertheless, and the sound of it shook the windows. “There’s no offense in me. I am like that.”

André-Louis said, “What a pity.”

It disconcerted the 'king of the markets.' “Eh? What’s this, Chapelier?” Danton asked. “Does your friend here put on airs?”

The neat Breton, looking like a true dandy by contrast with his companion, had a blunt manner just as brutal as Danton's, though he avoided crude language. He shrugged as he answered him:

“It is merely that he doesn’t like your manners,” Le Chapelier said. “Which is not at all surprising. They are execrable.”

“Ah, bah! You’re all like that, you damn Bretons,” Danton said. “Let’s get to business. You’ve probably heard what took place in the Assembly yesterday? You haven’t? My God, where do you live? Have you heard that this scoundrel who calls himself King of France gave passage across French soil the other day to Austrian troops going to crush those who fight for liberty in Belgium? Have you heard that, by any chance?”

“Yes,” André-Louis said coldly, masking his irritation at the other’s hectoring manner. “I have heard that.”

“Oh! And what do you think of it?” the Colossus asked, arms akimbo, towering above him.

André-Louis turned aside to Le Chapelier.

“I don’t think I understand,” André-Louis said. “Have you brought this gentleman here to examine my conscience?”

“Name of a name! He’s prickly as a damn porcupine!” Danton protested.

“No, no,” Le Chapelier said, conciliatory and trying to counteract his companion’s irritating manner. “We require your help, André. Danton here thinks that you are the very man for us. Listen now…”

“That’s it. You tell him,” Danton agreed. “You both talk the same mincing sort of French. He’ll probably understand you.”

Le Chapelier went on without heeding the interruption. “The King’s violation of the obvious rights of a country engaged in framing a constitution that shall make it free has shattered every philanthropic illusion we still cherished. There are those who go so far as to proclaim the King the sworn enemy of France. But that, of course, is excessive.”

“Who says so?” Danton blazed, swearing horribly to convey his total disagreement.

Le Chapelier waved him into silence and proceeded.

“Anyway, this matter, added to all the rest, has been more than enough to cause another uproar in the Assembly. It is open war between the Third Estate and the Privileged.”

“Has it ever been anything else?” André-Louis asked.

“Perhaps not,” Le Chapelier conceded. “But it has assumed a new character. You’ve probably heard about the duel between Lameth and the Duc de Castries?”

"A trifling affair."

"Only in its results. But it could have turned out very differently. Mirabeau is challenged and insulted now at every sitting. But he carries on, cool and calculating. Others aren't so careful. They meet insult with insult, blow with blow. Blood is being shed in private duels. These noble swordsmen have turned it into a system."

André-Louis nodded. He was thinking of Philippe de Vilmorin. He said, "Yes, it's an old trick of theirs. It's so simple and direct, just like them. I only wonder why they didn't think of this system sooner. In the early days of the States-General, at Versailles, it might have had a better effect. Now, it's a little late."

Danton cried, "But they mean to make up for lost time, by God! Challenges are flying left and right between these bully-swordsmen, these hired duelists, and poor devils of the robe who have never learned to fence with anything but a quill. It's just plain murder. Yet if I were to go among these noble gentlemen and crunch an addled head or two with this stick of mine, or snap a few aristocratic necks with these fingers God gave me for the purpose, the law would send me to the gallows to pay for it. This in a land that is striving after liberty. Why, damn me! I'm not even allowed to keep my hat on in the theater. But they, these scoundrels!"

Le Chapelier said, "He is right. This has become unbearable, insufferable. Two days ago, Monsieur d'Ambly threatened Mirabeau with his cane before the whole Assembly. Yesterday, Monsieur de Faussigny leapt up and harangued his fellow nobles, practically inviting murder. He asked, 'Why don't we fall on these scoundrels, sword in hand?' Those were his exact words: 'Why don't we fall on these scoundrels, sword in hand?'"

André-Louis said, "It is so much simpler than lawmaking."

"Lagron, the deputy from Ancenis in the Loire, said something in response that we didn't hear. As he was leaving the Manege, one of these bullies grossly insulted him. Lagron merely used his elbow to push past. But the fellow cried out that he had been struck and issued his challenge. They fought early this morning in the Champs Elysees. Lagron was killed, deliberately run through the stomach by a man who fought like a fencing master. Poor Lagron didn't even own a sword. He had to borrow one just to go to the duel."

André-Louis, his mind still on Vilmorin, whose situation was being repeated here, even down to the details, was swept by a gust of passion. He clenched his hands, and his jaw set. Danton's little eyes observed him keenly.

"Well? What do you think of that? Noblesse oblige, eh? The thing is, we must oblige them too, these murderers. We must pay them back in the same coin. We must meet them with the same weapons. Abolish them. Tumble these assassins into the abyss of nothingness by the same means."

"But how?"

"How? For God's sake! Haven't I said it?"

Le Chapelier put in, "That is where we require your help. There must be men of patriotic feeling among your more advanced pupils. Monsieur Danton's idea is that a small band of these men, say a half-dozen, with yourself at their head, might teach these bullies a sharp lesson."

André-Louis frowned.

"And how, precisely, had Monsieur Danton thought this might be done?"

Monsieur Danton spoke for himself, vehemently.

"Why, like this: We station you in the Manege, at the hour when the Assembly is adjourning. We point out the six leading bloodletters, and let you loose to insult them before they have time to insult any of the representatives. Then tomorrow morning, six of these bloodletters will be bled themselves, according to the art. That will give the others something to think about. It will give them a great deal to think about, by God! If necessary, the dose may be repeated to ensure a cure. If you kill them, so much the better."

He paused, his sallow face flushed with the enthusiasm of his idea. André-Louis stared at him, his expression unreadable.

"Well, what do you say to that?"

"That it is most ingenious," André-Louis said, and then turned aside to look out of the window.

"And is that all you think of it?"

"I won't tell you what else I think of it, because you probably wouldn't understand. For you, Monsieur Danton, there's at least the excuse that you didn't know me. But you, Isaac, to bring this gentleman here with such a proposal!"

Le Chapelier was overwhelmed with confusion. He apologized, "I confess I hesitated. But Monsieur Danton wouldn't take my word for it that the proposal might not be to your taste."

Danton broke in, bellowing, "I would not!" He swung towards Le Chapelier, brandishing his great arms. "You told me Monsieur was a patriot. Patriotism knows no scruples. You call this mincing dancing master a patriot?"

"Would you, Monsieur, out of patriotism, consent to become an assassin?"

"Of course I would. Haven't I told you so? Haven't I told you that I would gladly go among them with my club and crack them like so many fleas?"

"Why not, then?"

"Why not? Because I'd get myself hanged. Haven't I said so?"

"But what about that, being a patriot? Why not, like another Curtius, jump into the gulf, since you believe your country would benefit by your death?"

Monsieur Danton showed signs of exasperation. He said, "Because my country will benefit more by my life."

"Permit me, Monsieur, to suffer from a similar vanity."

"You? But where would you be in danger? You would do your work under the guise of dueling, just like them."

"Have you considered, monsieur, that the law will hardly see a fencing-master who kills his opponent as an ordinary combatant? Especially if it can be shown that the fencing-master himself provoked the attack?"

"So! Blast it all!" M. Danton puffed out his cheeks and spoke with withering scorn. "It comes down to this, then: you are afraid!"

"You may think so if you choose. You may think I'm afraid to do slyly and treacherously what a boastful patriot like yourself is afraid of doing frankly and openly. I have other reasons. But that one should be enough for you."

Danton gasped. Then he swore more astonishingly and creatively than ever.

"By God! You are right," he admitted, to André-Louis' amazement. "You are right, and I am wrong. I am as bad a patriot as you are, and I am a coward as well." He invoked the whole Pantheon to witness his self-denunciation. "Only, you see, I count for something. If they take me and hang me, well, that's that! Monsieur, we must find some other way. Forgive the intrusion. Adieu!" He held out his enormous hand.

Le Chapelier stood hesitating, looking crestfallen.

"You understand, André? I am sorry that..."

"Say no more, please. Come and see me again soon. I would urge you to stay, but it's striking nine, and my first pupil is about to arrive."

"Nor would I permit it," Danton said. "Between us, we must solve the riddle of how to get rid of Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr and his friends."

"Who?"

That question came sharp as a pistol-shot, just as Danton was turning away. Its tone stopped him short. He turned back, Le Chapelier with him.

"I said Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr."

"What does he have to do with the proposal you were making me?"

"He? Why, he is the chief bloodletter."

And Le Chapelier added, "It is he who killed Lagron."

"He's not a friend of yours, is he?" Danton wondered.

"And it is La Tour d'Azyr you want me to kill?" André-Louis asked very slowly, like someone whose thoughts were still pondering the subject.

"That's it," Danton said. "And it's not a job for a beginner, I can assure you."

"Ah, but this changes things," André-Louis said, thinking aloud. "It offers a great temptation."

"Why, then...?" The Colossus took another step towards him.

"Wait!" He raised his hand. Then, with his chin sunk on his chest, he paced away to the window, deep in thought.

Le Chapelier and Danton exchanged glances. Then they watched him, waiting, while he considered.

At first, he almost wondered why he hadn't, on his own, decided on a course like this to settle his long-standing score with Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr. What was the point of the great fencing skill he had acquired, unless he could use it to avenge Vilmorin and protect Aline from the lure of her own ambition? It would be easy to seek out La Tour d'Azyr, mortally insult him, and thus force him into a duel. Today, this would be murder, as treacherous as what La Tour d'Azyr had done to Philippe de Vilmorin. For today, the old positions were reversed, and it was André-Louis who could go to such an encounter without a doubt of the outcome. He quickly dismissed that moral obstacle. But the legal obstacle he had explained to Danton remained. There was still a law in France; the same law he had found impossible to use against La Tour d'Azyr, but which would act swiftly enough against himself in a similar situation. And then, suddenly, as if by inspiration, he saw the way. If adopted, this way would likely bring La Tour d'Azyr to a poetic justice, bringing him, insolent and confident, to thrust himself upon André-Louis' sword, with all the blame for the provocation on his own side.

He turned to them again. They saw that he was very pale, and his great dark eyes glowed oddly.

"There will probably be some difficulty finding a replacement for this poor Lagron," he said. "Our fellow countrymen won't be so eager to offer themselves to the swords of Privilege."

"True enough," Le Chapelier said gloomily. Then, as if suddenly grasping what was in André-Louis' mind, he cried, "André! Would you..."

"It is what I was considering. It would give me a legitimate place in the Assembly. If your La Tour d'Azyrs choose to seek me out then, their blood will be upon their own heads. I shall certainly do nothing to discourage them." He smiled curiously. "I am just a rascal who tries to be honest. Scaramouche, always, in fact. A creature of sophistries. Do you think Ancenis would have me as its representative?"

"Will it have Omnes Omnibus as its representative?" Le Chapelier was laughing, his face eager. "Ancenis will be bursting with pride. It's not Rennes or Nantes, as it might have been had you wished it. But it gives you a voice for Brittany."

"I should have to go to Ancenis..."

“No need at all. A letter from me to the Municipality, and they will confirm you at once. You won't even need to move from here. The whole thing can be done in a fortnight at most. So, it's settled then?”

André-Louis thought for another moment. He considered his academy. But he could arrange for Le Duc and Galoche to run it for him, while he still directed and advised. Le Duc, after all, had become a thoroughly efficient master, and he was a trustworthy fellow. If needed, a third assistant could be hired.

“So be it,” he said at last.

Le Chapelier clasped hands with him and became enthusiastically talkative, until the red-coated giant at the door interrupted him.

“What exactly does this mean for our business, anyway?” he asked. “Does it mean that once you're a representative, you won't hesitate to skewer M. le Marquis?”

“If M. le Marquis offers himself to be skewered, as he no doubt will.”

“I see the distinction,” M. Danton said, and sneered. “You have an ingenious mind.” He turned to Le Chapelier. “What did you say he was to begin with? A lawyer, wasn't it?”

“Yes, I was a lawyer, and afterwards a street performer.”

“And this is the result!”

“As you say. And do you know that we're not so dissimilar after all, you and I?”

“What?”

“Once, like you, I went around inciting other people to go and kill the man I wanted dead. You'll say I was a coward, of course.”

Le Chapelier prepared to step between them as a frown gathered on the giant's brow. Then the frown disappeared again, and the great laugh vibrated through the long room.

“You've touched me for the second time, and in the same place. Oh, you can fence, my lad. We should be friends. Rue des Cordeliers is my address. Any scoundrel will tell you where Danton lives. Desmoulins lives underneath. Come and visit us one evening. There's always a bottle for a friend.”
