CHAPTER 5. MADAME DE PLOUGASTEL

The postilion stopped the carriage. The footman opened the door, lowered the steps, and offered his arm to his mistress to help her get out, as she had requested. Then he opened one side of the iron gates and held it for her. She was a woman a little over forty, who must once have been very lovely. She was still very lovely, with the graceful quality that age brings to some women. Her dress and carriage both showed her high social standing.

"I'll take my leave here, since you have a visitor," André-Louis said.

"But it's an old acquaintance of your own, André. You remember Madame la Comtesse de Plougastel?"

He looked at the approaching lady. Aline was now hurrying forward to meet her. When Aline said her name, he recognized her. He thought that if he had just looked, he would have recognized her without anyone telling him, no matter where or when. This was true even though it had been about sixteen years since he last saw her. The sight of her now brought it all back to him. It was a treasured memory that had never been completely overshadowed by later events.

When he was a ten-year-old boy, just before he was sent to school at Rennes, she had come to visit his godfather, who was her cousin. It happened that at the time, Rabouillet had brought him to the Manor of Gavrillac. There, he had been presented to Madame de Plougastel. The great lady, then in the full glory of her youthful beauty, had a gentle, cultured voice. It was so cultured that she seemed to speak a language almost unknown to the little Breton boy. Her grand manner of high society had scared him a little at first. But she had very gently calmed his fears. By some mysterious enchantment, she had completely captivated him. He now recalled the terror he felt when he was told to hug her, and how unwillingly he had left those soft, round arms afterward. He also remembered how sweetly she had smelled and the exact perfume she had used, a scent like lilac. Memory is remarkably strong when it comes to these things.

For three days while she was at Gavrillac, he had gone daily to the manor. He had spent hours in her company. She was a childless woman, but with strong maternal instincts. She had taken this bright, wide-eyed boy, who was wise beyond his years, to her heart.

He remembered her saying to his godfather on the final day, "Give him to me, Cousin Quintin. Let me take him back with me to Versailles as my adopted child."

But the Seigneur had solemnly shook his head, refusing without a word. The idea was never brought up again. Then, when she said goodbye to him, all came rushing back to him now, there had been tears in her eyes.

"Think of me sometimes, André-Louis," were her last words.

He remembered how flattered he had been to win the affection of this great lady in such a short time. It had given him a sense of importance that lasted for months, before finally fading away.

But now, seeing her again after sixteen years, everything was vividly remembered. She was deeply changed and matured. The girl he remembered, for she had been little more than that back then, was now a sophisticated woman with an air of calm dignity and complete self-assurance. Yet, he felt certain he would have recognized her anywhere.

Aline embraced her affectionately. Then, answering the questioning glance, with slightly raised eyebrows, that Madame directed towards Aline’s companion, she said, "This is André-Louis. You remember André-Louis, Madame?"

Madame paused. André-Louis saw the surprise spread across her face, draining some of her color and leaving her breathless for a moment.

Then her voice, the well-remembered rich, musical voice, richer and deeper now than it had been before, repeated his name:

"André-Louis!"

The way she said it suggested it brought back memories, perhaps of the youthful past that was linked to him. She paused for a long moment, looking at him with wide eyes while he bowed.

"But of course I remember him," she said at last. She came towards him and offered her hand. He kissed it dutifully, submissively, and instinctively. "And this is what you have grown into?" She looked him over. He flushed with pride, hearing the satisfaction in her tone. He seemed to have gone back sixteen years, feeling like the little Breton boy at Gavrillac again. She turned to Aline. "How wrong Quintin was in his assumptions. He was pleased to see him again, wasn't he?"

"So pleased, Madame, that he has kicked me out," André-Louis said.

"Ah!" She frowned, still studying him with her dark, wistful eyes. "We must change that, Aline. He is, of course, very angry with you. But that's not the way to win people over. I will speak on your behalf, André-Louis. I am a good advocate."

He thanked her and said goodbye.

"I gratefully leave my case in your hands. My respects, Madame."

And so it happened that, despite his godfather's cold reception, a snatch of a song was on his lips as his yellow carriage sped him back to Paris and the Rue du Hasard. That meeting with Madame de Plougastel had encouraged him. Her promise to plead his case, working with Aline, assured him that everything would be fine.

His optimism proved justified when, the following Thursday around noon, his academy was "invaded" by Monsieur de Kercadiou. Gilles, his young assistant, brought him the news. He immediately stopped the lesson he was teaching. He pulled off his mask and went downstairs as he was, wearing a chamois waistcoat buttoned to his chin, with his foil tucked under his arm. His godfather was waiting in the modest salon below.

The florid, short Lord of Gavrillac stood almost defiantly, ready to receive him.

"I have been persuaded to forgive you against my better judgment," he announced aggressively. He seemed to imply that he was only agreeing to end tiresome nagging.

André-Louis wasn't fooled. He recognized a pretense the Seigneur was using to make a graceful retreat.

"My blessings on whoever did the persuading. You've restored my happiness, my godfather."

He took the hand offered to him and kissed it, following the old habit from his boyhood. This act symbolized his complete submission. It reestablished the bond between him and his godfather, that of the protected and the protector, with all the mutual claims and duties that came with it. No words could have more completely made his peace with the man who loved him.

Monsieur de Kercadiou’s face flushed a deeper pink. His lip trembled, and his voice was husky as he murmured, “My dear boy!” Then he composed himself, threw back his head, and frowned. His voice returned to its usual shrillness. “I hope you realize that you have behaved damnably... damnably, and with the utmost ingratitude?”

“Doesn’t that depend on your point of view?” André-Louis asked, his tone carefully conciliatory.

“It depends on a fact, not on any point of view,” Monsieur de Kercadiou replied. “Since I’ve been persuaded to overlook it, I trust you at least intend to reform.”

“I... I will abstain from politics,” André-Louis said. That was the most he could truthfully say.

“That is something, at least.” His godfather allowed himself to be appeased, now that a concession, or a seeming concession, had been made to his justified resentment.

“A chair, monsieur.”

“No, no. I’ve come to take you with me to pay a visit. You owe it entirely to Madame de Plougastel that I agree to see you again. I want you to come with me to thank her.”

“I have my engagements here...” André-Louis began, then broke off. “No matter! I will arrange it. Just a moment.” He turned away to re-enter the academy.

“What are your engagements? You aren’t by any chance a fencing instructor?” Monsieur de Kercadiou asked. He had noticed the leather waistcoat and the foil tucked under André-Louis’ arm.

“I am the master of this academy,” André-Louis replied. “It’s the academy of the late Bertrand des Amis, the most flourishing school of arms in Paris today.”

Monsieur de Kercadiou’s eyebrows went up.

“And you are master of it?”

“Maitre en fait d’Armes,” André-Louis confirmed. “I took over the academy after des Amis’ death.”

He left Monsieur Kercadiou to think it over. André-Louis went to make his arrangements and change his clothes.

“So that’s why you’ve started wearing a sword,” Monsieur de Kercadiou said as they climbed into his waiting carriage.

“That, and the need to protect oneself in these times.”

“And do you mean to tell me that a man who lives by what is, after all, an honorable profession, one mainly supported by the nobility, can at the same time associate himself with these petty lawyers and low pamphleteers who are spreading dissension and insubordination?”

“You forget that I am a petty lawyer myself, made so by your own wishes, monsieur.”

Monsieur de Kercadiou grunted and took snuff. “You say the academy flourishes?” he asked after a moment.

“It does. I have two assistant instructors. I could employ a third. It’s hard work.”

“That should mean your circumstances are affluent.”

“I have reason to be satisfied. I have far more than I need.”

“Then you’ll be able to do your share in paying off this national debt,” the nobleman growled. He was quite pleased that, as he saw it, some of the trouble André-Louis had helped to create should now affect him.

Then the conversation shifted to Madame de Plougastel. André-Louis understood that Monsieur de Kercadiou strongly disapproved of this visit, though he didn't know why. But Madame la Comtesse was a headstrong woman whom no one could deny, and whom everyone obeyed. Monsieur de Plougastel was currently in Germany but would be returning shortly. This was an indiscreet admission. From it, it was easy to infer that Monsieur de Plougastel was one of those secretive emissaries who traveled between the Queen of France and her brother, the Emperor of Austria.

The carriage pulled up before a handsome mansion in the Faubourg Saint-Denis, at the corner of the Rue Paradis. A sleek servant ushered them into a small boudoir, all gilt and brocade, which opened onto a terrace above a garden that was a miniature park. Madame awaited them there. She rose, dismissed the young woman who had been reading to her, and came forward with both hands extended to greet her cousin Kercadiou.

“I almost feared you wouldn’t keep your word,” she said. “It was unjust. But then, I hardly hoped you would succeed in bringing him.” Her glance, gentle and smiling, welcomed André-Louis and indicated him.

The young man responded with formal gallantry.

“The memory of you, madame, is too deeply imprinted on my heart for any persuasion to have been necessary.”

“Ah, the courtier!” Madame said, and let him take her hand. “We are to have a little talk, André-Louis,” she informed him, with a seriousness that left him vaguely uneasy.

They sat down. For a while, the conversation was general, but it mainly focused on André-Louis, his work, and his opinions. All the while, Madame studied him attentively with her gentle, wistful eyes. That familiar feeling of unease started to creep over him again. He instinctively knew he'd been brought here for a deeper reason than what they'd stated.

Finally, as if it had all been planned—and the clumsy Lord of Gavrillac was certainly not good at hiding his intentions—his godfather stood up. He claimed he wanted to look at the garden, then strolled through the windows onto the terrace. Scarlet geraniums spilled over its white stone balustrade. From there, he disappeared into the foliage below.

Madame said, "Now we can talk more intimately. Come here and sit beside me." She gestured to the empty half of the settee where she sat.

André-Louis went obediently, though a little uncomfortably. She placed a hand on his arm and said gently, "You know you've behaved very badly, don't you? Your godfather's resentment is quite justified."

"Madame, if I believed that, I would be the most unhappy, the most despairing of men." He then explained himself, just as he had to his godfather on Sunday. "What I did, I did because it was the only way I could fight an infamous scoundrel. He had killed my best friend in a wanton, brutal act of murder, and there was no law to punish him. Justice in this country was paralyzed by Privilege. And as if that weren't enough—forgive my utmost frankness, Madame—he later corrupted the woman I was going to marry."

"Ah, mon Dieu!" she cried.

"Forgive me. I know it's horrible. Perhaps you can understand what I suffered, how I was driven to act. That last incident I'm guilty of—the riot that started in the Feydau Theatre and then spread across the entire city of Nantes—was provoked by this very thing."

"Who was she, this girl?"

It was just like a woman, he thought, to focus on the unimportant details.

"Oh, a theatre girl, a poor fool I have no regrets about. Her name was La Binet. I was an actor in her father's troupe at the time. That was after the Rennes affair, when I had to hide from the kind of justice that exists in France—the gallows' justice for unfortunates who aren't 'born' into privilege. This additional wrong led me to provoke a riot in the theatre."

"Poor boy," she said tenderly. "Only a woman's heart can truly understand what you must have suffered. Because of that, I can so easily forgive you. But now..."

"Ah, but you don't understand, Madame. If today I thought I had only personal reasons for helping in the holy work of abolishing Privilege, I believe I'd cut my throat. My true justification lies in the insincerity of those who intended the convocation of the States General to be a sham, mere dust in the eyes of the nation."

"Was it not, perhaps, wise to have been insincere in such a matter?"

He looked at her blankly.

"Can it ever be wise, Madame, to be insincere?"

"Oh, indeed it can. Believe me, I'm twice your age and I know my world."

"I would say, Madame, that nothing is wise if it complicates existence. And I know of nothing that complicates it as much as insincerity. Consider for a moment the complications that have come from this."

"But surely, André-Louis, your views haven't become so twisted that you don't see a governing class is necessary in any country?"

"Why, of course. But not necessarily a hereditary one."

"What else?"

He answered her with an epigram. "Man, Madame, is the child of his own work. Let rights be inherited only from such a parent. That way, a nation's best will always rise to the top, and such a nation will achieve great things."

"But do you consider birth to be of no importance?"

"Of none, Madame, or else my own might trouble me." A deep flush stained her face, and he feared he had offended her with what was almost an indelicacy. But the scolding he expected didn't come. Instead...

"And does it not?" she asked. "Never, André?"

"Never, Madame. I am content."

"You have never... never regretted your lack of parents' care?"

He laughed, brushing aside her sweet, charitable concern, which he found so unnecessary. "On the contrary, Madame, I tremble to think what they might have made of me. I'm grateful to have had the chance to fashion myself."

She looked at him for a moment, very sadly. Then, smiling, she gently shook her head.

"You don't want self-satisfaction... Yet I wish you saw things differently, André. This is a moment of great opportunities for a young man of talent and spirit. I could help you. I could help you, perhaps, to go very far if you would allow yourself to be helped in my way."

"Yes," he thought, "help me to a noose by sending me on treasonable missions to Austria on the Queen's behalf, like Monsieur de Plougastel. That would certainly end in a high position for me."

He replied aloud, his voice guided by politeness. "I am grateful, madame. But you must understand that, holding the ideals I have expressed, I could not serve any cause that opposes their realization."

"You are misled by prejudice, André-Louis, by personal grievances. Will you allow them to block your advancement?"

"If what I call ideals were truly prejudices, would it be honest of me to act against them while still believing in them?"

"If only I could convince you that you are mistaken! I could help you so much to find a worthy use for your talents. In the King's service, you would prosper quickly. Will you think about it, André-Louis, and let us talk again?"

He answered her with formal, cool politeness.

"I fear that would be pointless, madame. Yet your interest in me is very flattering, and I thank you. It is unfortunate for me that I am so headstrong."

"And now, who is being insincere?" she asked him.

"Ah, but you see, madame, it is an insincerity that doesn't mislead anyone."

Then Monsieur de Kercadiou came in through the window again. He announced fussily that he had to get back to Meudon. He would take his godson with him and drop him off at the Rue du Hasard.

"You must bring him again, Quintin," the Countess said as they took their leave.

"Some day, perhaps," Monsieur de Kercadiou said vaguely. He swept his godson out.

In the carriage, he asked André-Louis bluntly what the Countess had talked about.

"She was very kind, a sweet woman," André-Louis said pensively.

"Confound it, I didn't ask for your presumed opinion of her. I asked what she said to you."

"She tried to point out the error of my ways. She spoke of great things I might do, things she would very kindly help me with, if I would only come to my senses. But since miracles don't happen, I gave her little reason to hope."

"I see. I see. Did she say anything else?"

He was so demanding that André-Louis turned to look at him.

"What else did you expect her to say, Monsieur my godfather?"

"Oh, nothing."

"Then she fulfilled your expectations."

"Eh? Oh, for heaven's sake, why can't you express yourself clearly, in a way a plain man can understand without having to think about it?"

After that, he sulked most of the way to the Rue du Hasard, or so it seemed to André-Louis. At least, he sat silent, gloomily thoughtful, judging by his expression.

"You may come and see us again soon at Meudon," he told André-Louis as they parted. "But please remember, no revolutionary politics in the future, if we are to remain friends."
