[Book 3 - Chapter 8: The Paladin of the Third]

Chapter 8. The Paladin of the Third

The Chevalier de Chabrillane had been closely connected, you will remember, with the wicked affair that cost Philippe de Vilmorin his life. We know enough to guess that he had not merely been La Tour d'Azyr's second in that duel, but actually an instigator of the whole business. André-Louis may therefore have felt a justifiable satisfaction in offering up the Chevalier's life to the memory of his murdered friend. He likely viewed it as an act of common justice that could not be achieved by any other means. We must also remember that Chabrillane had gone confidently to the duel, believing that as a practiced swordsman, he was dealing with a bourgeois utterly unskilled in fencing. Morally, then, he was little better than a murderer. The fact that he tumbled into the very pit he thought he had dug for André-Louis was poetic justice. Still, despite all this, I would find the cynical tone with which André-Louis announced the outcome to the Assembly utterly detestable, if I believed it was sincere. It would justify Aline's opinion, shared by so many others who had come into close contact with him, that André-Louis was completely heartless.

You have seen a similar heartlessness in his conduct when he discovered La Binet's betrayal, although the steps he took to avenge himself contradict that idea. I believe his subsequent contempt for the woman was born of the genuine affection he once had for her. I do not believe that this affection was as deep as he first imagined. But I also do not believe it was as shallow as he tried to make it appear, given how thoroughly he pretended to banish her from his mind after discovering her true nature. His actions certainly do not support that claim. Furthermore, his callous cynicism in hoping he had killed Binet is also an act. Knowing that creatures like Binet are better off dead, he could have felt no remorse. He possessed, you must remember, a rare level-headedness that saw things in their true proportions, never magnifying or shrinking them out of sentimentality. At the same time, it is simply incredible that he could contemplate taking a life with such complete, cynical calmness, no matter the justification.

Similarly, it is hard to believe that coming straight from the Bois de Boulogne, straight from killing a man, he would sincerely express his true nature by announcing the deed with such outrageous flippancy. He was not quite the incarnation of Scaramouche to that extent. However, he was definitely prone to masking his true feelings behind a dramatic gesture and hiding his real thoughts with a clever phrase. He was always the actor. He constantly calculated the effect he would produce, always avoiding true self-revelation, and always striving to cover his real character with a fake, assumed persona. This behavior contained a touch of mischievousness, along with other, more complex motives.

Nobody laughed at his flippancy now. He never intended for anyone to laugh. He meant to be terrifying, and he knew that the more casual and flippant his tone, the more terrifying the effect would be. He produced exactly the result he desired.

What happened next, in a place where emotions and political tactics had become so extreme, is not hard to guess. When the session ended, a dozen hired duelists were waiting for him in the lobby. This time, the men of his own party were less concerned about guarding him. He seemed completely capable of guarding himself. Despite his usual caution, he appeared to have taken the war directly into the enemy's camp and fully adopted their own brutal methods. Consequently, his allies hardly felt the need to protect him as they had the day before.

As he walked out, he scanned the hostile line of men, whose attitudes and clothes clearly marked them for what they were. He paused, looking for the specific man he expected, the man he most wanted to accommodate. But the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr was missing from those eager ranks. This struck André-Louis as odd. La Tour d'Azyr was Chabrillane's cousin and closest friend. Surely he should have been the first one there today. The truth was that La Tour d'Azyr was overwhelmed by shock and grief at the completely unexpected turn of events. Furthermore, his usual thirst for revenge was strangely held in check. Perhaps he, too, remembered Chabrillane's role in the Gavrillac tragedy. Perhaps he saw an ordained avenger in this obscure André-Louis Moreau, who had relentlessly persecuted him ever since. The reluctance he felt to force a confrontation, especially after this ultimate provocation, puzzled even the Marquis himself. But that reluctance existed, and it held him back now.

Since La Tour d'Azyr was not part of that waiting pack, it mattered little to André-Louis who would be next on that Tuesday morning. As it happened, the next man was the young Vicomte de La Motte-Royau, one of the deadliest swordsmen in the group.

On Wednesday morning, arriving an hour or so late to the Assembly, André-Louis made another announcement. Using much the same tone he had used to report Chabrillane's death, he stated that Monsieur de La Motte-Royau would probably not disturb the harmony of the Assembly for several weeks. That is, assuming the Vicomte was lucky enough to eventually recover from an unpleasant accident he had quite unexpectedly met with that morning.

On Thursday, he made an identical announcement regarding the Vidame de Blavon. On Friday, he told the Assembly that he had been delayed by Monsieur de Troiscantins. Then, turning to the members of the Right Wing and stretching his face into a mask of sympathetic gravity, he added a final note.

"I am glad to inform you, gentlemen, that Monsieur de Troiscantins is in the hands of a very competent surgeon. With proper care, the doctor hopes to restore him to your councils in a few weeks' time."

It was paralyzing, fantastic, and surreal. Friend and foe alike in that assembly sat stunned by those bland, daily announcements. Four of the most fearsome hired swordsmen had been put out of action, and one of them was dead. All of this had been accomplished with an air of total indifference and announced in the most casual terms by a wretched little provincial lawyer!

In their eyes, he began to take on a romantic, legendary quality. Even the group of left-wing philosophers, who refused to worship any power other than reason, began to view him with a respect and admiration that no brilliant speech could ever have earned him.

From the Assembly, his fame slowly seeped out across Paris. Desmoulins wrote a glowing tribute to him in his newspaper, "Les Révolutions," dubbing him the "Paladin of the Third Estate." The name captured the public's imagination and stuck with him for quite some time. He was mentioned disdainfully in the "Actes des Apôtres," the mocking newspaper of the Privileged party. That publication was light-heartedly and aggressively edited by a group of noblemen suffering from a severe case of political short-sightedness.

Friday marked the end of a very busy week for this young man, who even then continued to insist that he was in no way a man of action. As he casually and expectantly walked out of the Manège with Le Chapelier and Kersain, he found the lobby entirely empty of swordsmen.

He was so surprised that he stopped dead in his tracks.

"Have they had enough?" he wondered aloud, directing the question to Le Chapelier.

"They have had enough of you, I should think," Le Chapelier replied. "They will probably prefer to turn their attention to someone less capable of defending himself."

This was disappointing news. André-Louis had thrown himself into this dangerous game with a very specific goal in mind. Killing Chabrillane had been satisfying enough, as far as it went. He had considered it an acceptable appetizer. But the three men who followed were not his real targets at all. He had fought them with a certain amount of reluctance, dealing with each one as lightly as his own safety would allow. Was the harassment going to stop now, before the man he truly wanted had even shown his face? If so, he would have to force the issue!

Outside under the awning, a group of noblemen stood locked in intense conversation. Scanning the group with a quick glance, André-Louis spotted the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr among them. He tightened his lips. He could not be the one to provoke a fight directly. They had to be the ones to force a quarrel upon him. The "Actes des Apôtres" had already torn away his mask that morning, revealing to the world that he was the fencing master of the Rue du Hasard and the successor to Bertrand des Amis. It was already incredibly dangerous for a man of his social class to engage in single combat. This public exposure, offered as an excuse for the aristocrats' failures, made his position doubly hazardous.

Still, he could not leave things as they were, or all his efforts would have been for nothing. Carefully looking away from the group of gentlemen, he raised his voice so his words would carry clearly to their ears.

"It begins to look as if my fears of having to spend the rest of my days dueling in the Bois were pointless."

Out of the corner of his eye, he saw the stir his words caused in the group. The men turned to look at him, but for the moment, that was all. A little more prodding was necessary. Pacing slowly between his friends, he spoke again.

"But isn't it remarkable that the assassin of Lagron makes no move against Lagron's successor? Or perhaps it isn't remarkable at left. Perhaps there are good reasons. Perhaps the gentleman is just being prudent."

He had walked past the group by now. He let that last sentence trail behind him, and followed it with a burst of loud, insulting laughter.

He did not have to wait long. Quick footsteps sounded behind him, and a hand clamped heavily onto his shoulder, spinning him violently around. He found himself face to face with the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr. The nobleman's handsome face was pale and composed, but his eyes blazed with sudden, uncontrollable anger. Behind him, several members of his group were approaching more cautiously. The others, like André-Louis' two companions, simply stood and watched.

"You spoke of me, I think," the Marquis said quietly.

"I spoke of an assassin, yes. But I was speaking to my friends here." André-Louis' manner was just as quiet. In fact, he was the calmer of the two, playing the role of the more experienced actor.

"You spoke loudly enough to be overheard," the Marquis replied, addressing the implication that he had been eavesdropping.

"Those who want to overhear usually find a way to do so."

"I see that your goal is to be offensive."

"Oh, you are quite mistaken, Monsieur le Marquis. I have no desire to be offensive. But I do resent having hands violently laid upon me, especially when I cannot consider those hands to be clean. Under the circumstances, you can hardly expect me to be polite."

The older man's eyelids twitched. He almost caught himself admiring André-Louis' composed posture. More importantly, he feared his own behavior might look worse by comparison. This realization enraged him entirely, and he lost all control.

"You called me the assassin of Lagron. I won't pretend to misunderstand you. You explained your views to me once before, and I remember them well."

"I am flattered that you remember, monsieur!"

"You called me an assassin then, because I used my skill to eliminate a violent hothead who made the world unsafe for me. But how are you any better, Mr. Fencing Master, when you fight men whose skill is naturally far inferior to your own?"

The Marquis' friends looked serious and disturbed. It was truly unbelievable to see this great nobleman forget himself so completely. He was actually sinking to the level of arguing with a low-born, fencing lawyer. Worse still, it was an argument he was clearly losing, making himself look ridiculous in the process.

"I fight them?" André-Louis said, his tone full of amused protest. "Ah, forgive me, Monsieur le Marquis. They are the ones who chose to fight me, and very stupidly at that. They shove me, they slap my face, they step on my toes, and they call me vile names. So what if I am a fencing master? Does that mean I must silently accept every kind of abuse from your ill-mannered friends? Perhaps if they had discovered I was a fencing master sooner, their manners would have improved. But to blame me for their stupidity! What an injustice!"

"Comedian!" the Marquis spat contemptuously. "Does that change the facts? Are these men who challenged you professional swordsmen who live by the blade, like you do?"

"On the contrary, Monsieur le Marquis. I have found them to be men who die by the blade with astonishing ease. I cannot imagine you want to join their ranks."

"And why is that, if you please?" La Tour d'Azyr's face flushed bright red at the sneer.

"Oh," André-Louis raised his eyebrows and pursed his lips, pretending to think it over. He delivered his answer slowly. "Because, monsieur, you prefer easy victims. You prefer the Lagrons and Vilmorins of this world, mere sheep for your butchery. That is why."

And then, the Marquis struck him across the face.

André-Louis stepped back. His eyes flashed for a second; the next moment, he was smiling up into the face of his tall enemy.

"You are no better than the others, after all! Well, well! Notice, I beg you, how history repeats itself, with a few small differences. Because poor Vilmorin could not bear a vile lie you used to taunt him, he struck you. Because you cannot bear an equally vile truth I have spoken, you strike me. But the vileness is always yours. And now, just as it was back then, the penalty for striking a blow is..." He paused. "But why even name it? You know what it is. You wrote the rules yourself that day, with the point of your overly eager sword. But very well. I will meet you if you desire it, monsieur."

"What else do you think I desire? To talk?"

André-Louis turned to his friends and let out a tired sigh. "It seems I am to take another trip to the Bois. Isaac, perhaps you will kindly have a word with one of the Marquis' friends and arrange things for nine o'clock tomorrow, as usual."

"Not tomorrow," the Marquis said sharply to Le Chapelier. "I have a prior engagement in the country that I cannot postpone."

Le Chapelier looked questioningly at André-Louis.

"Then, to accommodate Monsieur le Marquis, we will say Sunday at the same hour."

"I do not fight on Sunday. I am not a pagan who breaks the holy day."

"Surely the good Lord would not presume to damn a gentleman of your high quality over such a small detail? Ah, well, Isaac, please arrange it for Monday, assuming it isn't a feast day or monsieur hasn't scheduled another pressing engagement. I leave it in your capable hands."

He bowed with the weary air of a man bored by tedious details, looped his arm through Kersain's, and walked away.

"Good God! You certainly have a knack for this," said the Breton deputy, who was completely unfamiliar with the subtle arts of dueling.

"I certainly do. I have taken lessons from the very best." André-Louis laughed. He was in an excellent mood. And from that moment on, Kersain joined the ranks of those who considered André-Louis a man entirely without a heart or a conscience.

But in his "Confessions," André-Louis reveals the truth. This is one of those rare glimpses that shows the real man hiding beneath all the make-believe. He writes that on that very night, he fell to his knees to speak with his dead friend Philippe. He called upon his friend's spirit to witness that he was finally about to take the last step in fulfilling the oath he had sworn over Philippe's body at Gavrillac, two long years ago.
