CHAPTER 9. TORN PRIDE

M. de La Tour d'Azyr's engagement in the country that Sunday was with M. de Kercadiou. To fulfill it, he drove out early that day to Meudon. In his pocket, he carried a copy of the latest "Les Actes des Apôtres," a journal whose cheerful jabs at the innovators greatly amused the Seigneur de Gavrillac. The venomous scorn it poured on those worthless scoundrels offered him some comfort against the discomforts of expatriation. He suffered from this expatriation because of their detestable actions.

M. de La Tour d'Azyr had visited the Lord of Gavrillac at Meudon twice in the last month. Each time, the sight of Aline, so sweet, fresh, bright, and lively-minded, reignited embers that had smoldered under the ashes of the past. Until now, he had believed these embers were completely extinguished. He desired her as we desire Heaven. I believe it was the purest passion of his life. If it had come to him earlier, he might have been a vastly different man. The cruelest wound he had ever received in his selfish life was when she sent him word. This happened quite definitively after the Feydau incident. She stated that she could not receive him again under any circumstances. In one blow, through that disgraceful riot, he had been robbed of a mistress he prized. He also lost a wife who had become a necessity to his very soul. The sordid love of La Binet might have consoled him for the forced renunciation of his exalted love for Aline. Similarly, he had been ready to sacrifice his attachment to La Binet for his exalted love for Aline. But that ill-timed riot had robbed him at once of both. Faithful to his word to Sautron, he had definitively broken with La Binet. He then found that Aline had definitively broken with him. By the time he had sufficiently recovered from his grief to think of La Binet again, the comedienne had vanished without a trace.

For all this, he blamed André-Louis, and most bitterly so. That low-born provincial lout pursued him like a Nemesis. He had indeed become the evil genius of his life. That was it: the evil genius of his life! And it was likely that on Monday... He did not like to think of Monday. He was not particularly afraid of death. He was as brave as others of his kind in that respect. He was too brave in the ordinary way, and too confident of his skill, to have even remotely considered the possibility of dying in a duel. It was just that it would seem like a proper culmination of all the evil he had suffered, directly or indirectly, through this André-Louis Moreau. He would perish ignobly by Moreau's hand. Almost he could hear that insolent, pleasant voice making the flippant announcement to the Assembly on Monday morning.

He shook off the mood, angry with himself for even having it. It was maudlin. After all, Chabrillane and La Motte-Royau were quite exceptional swordsmen. But neither of them truly approached his own formidable skill. A different reaction began to flow as he drove out through country lanes flooded with pleasant September sunshine. His spirits rose. A premonition of victory stirred within him. Far from fearing Monday's meeting, as he had been doing so unreasonably, he began to look forward to it. It would provide him with the means to put a definite end to this persecution, of which he had been the victim. He would crush this insolent and persistent flea that had been stinging him at every opportunity. Carried upward on that wave of optimism, he soon took a more hopeful view of his situation with Aline.

At their first meeting a month ago, he had used the utmost frankness with her. He had told her the whole truth about his motives for going to the Feydau that night. He had made her realize that she had acted unjustly towards him. True, he had gone no further.

But that was a significant step for a beginning. And in their last meeting, now two weeks old, she had received him with frank friendliness. True, she had been a little aloof. But that was to be expected until he quite explicitly admitted that he had revived the hope of winning her. He had been a fool not to have returned before today.

So, in that mood of newfound confidence, a confidence risen from the very ashes of despondency, he arrived at Meudon that Sunday morning. He was gay and jovial with M. de Kercadiou while he waited in the salon for mademoiselle to appear. He pronounced with confidence on the country's future. There were signs already of a change of opinion, of a more moderate note. He wore the rosiest spectacles that morning. The Nation was beginning to perceive where this lawyer rabble was leading it. He pulled out "The Acts of the Apostles" and read a stinging paragraph. Then, when mademoiselle finally made her appearance, he handed the journal to M. de Kercadiou.

M. de Kercadiou, with his niece's future to consider, went to read the paper in the garden. He took a position where he could keep the couple in sight, as his obligations seemed to demand of him, while still being discreetly out of earshot.

The Marquis made the most of an opportunity that might be brief. He quite frankly declared his feelings. He begged and implored to be taken back into Aline's good graces. He asked to be admitted at least to the hope that one day, very soon, she would bring herself to consider him in a closer relationship.

He told her, his voice vibrating with a feeling that admitted no doubt, "Mademoiselle, you cannot lack conviction of my utter sincerity. The very constancy of my devotion should assure you of this. It is just that I should have been banished from you, since I showed myself so utterly unworthy of the great honor to which I aspired. But this banishment has in no way diminished my devotion. If you could imagine what I have suffered, you would agree that I have fully atoned for my abject fault."

She looked at him with a curious, gentle wistfulness on her lovely face.

"Monsieur," she said, "it is not you whom I doubt. It is myself."

"You mean your feelings towards me?" he asked.

"Yes."

"But that I can understand," he said. "After what has happened..."

"It was always so, monsieur," she interrupted quietly. "You speak of me as if I were lost to you by your own action. That is saying too much. Let me be frank with you. Monsieur, I was never yours to lose. I am conscious of the honor that you do me. I esteem you very deeply..."

"But then," he cried, on a high note of confidence, "from such a beginning..."

"Who shall assure me that it is a beginning?" she asked. "May it not be the whole? Had I held you in affection, monsieur, I would have sent for you after the affair of which you have spoken. I would at least not have condemned you without hearing your explanation. As it was..." She shrugged, smiling gently and sadly. "You see..."

But his optimism, far from being crushed, was stimulated. "But it is to give me hope, mademoiselle," he said. "If I already possess so much, I may look with confidence to win more. I shall prove myself worthy. I swear to do that. Who, being permitted the privilege of being near you, could do other than seek to render himself worthy?"

Then, before she could add a word, M. de Kercadiou came blustering through the window. His spectacles were on his forehead, his face was inflamed, and he waved "The Acts of the Apostles" in his hand. He seemed to be reduced to speechlessness.

Had the Marquis expressed himself aloud, he would have been profane. As it was, he bit his lip in vexation at this most inopportune interruption.

Aline sprang up, alarmed by her uncle's agitation.

"What has happened?" she asked.

"Happened?" He finally found his voice. "The scoundrel! The faithless dog! I consented to overlook the past on the clear condition that he would avoid revolutionary politics in the future. He accepted that condition. And now," he smacked the news-sheet furiously, "he has played me false again. Not only has he gone into politics once more, but he is actually a member of the Assembly. What is worse, he has been using his assassin's skill as a fencing-master, turning himself into a bully-swordsman. My God! Is there any law left in France at all?"

M. de La Tour d'Azyr had entertained one doubt, though only faintly, that marred the perfect serenity of his growing optimism. That doubt concerned this man Moreau and his relations with M. de Kercadiou. He knew what their relationship had once been. He also knew how it had subsequently changed due to Moreau's ungrateful behavior, turning against the class to which his benefactor belonged. What he did not know was that a reconciliation had taken place. For in the past month, ever since circumstances had driven André-Louis to depart from his undertaking to steer clear of politics, the young man had not ventured to approach Meudon. As it happened, his name had not been mentioned in La Tour d'Azyr's hearing during either of his own previous visits. He learned of that reconciliation now. But he learned at the same time that the breach was renewed, and made wider and more impassable than ever. Therefore, he did not hesitate to state his own position.

"There is a law," he answered. "The law that this rash young man himself invokes. The law of the sword." He spoke very gravely, almost sadly. For he realized that, after all, the ground was tender. "You are not to suppose that he will continue indefinitely his career of evil and murder. Sooner or later he will meet a sword that will avenge the others. You have observed that my cousin Chabrillane is among the number of this assassin's victims. He was killed last Tuesday."

"If I have not expressed my condolences, Azyr, it is because my indignation at the moment stifles every other feeling. The scoundrel! You say that sooner or later he will meet a sword that will avenge the others. I pray that it may be soon."

The Marquis answered him quietly, with nothing but sorrow in his voice. "I think your prayer is likely to be heard," he said. "This wretched young man has an engagement for tomorrow, when his account may be definitively settled."

His calm conviction made his words sound like a death sentence. They instantly stopped M. de Kercadiou’s anger. The color drained from his flushed face. A look of dread filled his pale eyes, showing M. de La Tour d’Azyr, more clearly than any words, that M. de Kercadiou’s heated outburst had been thoughtless anger. His earlier prayer for his godson’s swift punishment had been unconsciously insincere. Now, faced with the reality that this punishment was about to fall upon that scoundrel, his gentle and kind nature took over. His anger was suddenly replaced by apprehension. His affection for the young man rose to the surface, making André-Louis’s sin, however terrible, seem insignificant compared to the threatened penalty.

M. de Kercadiou moistened his lips.

He asked, "With whom is this engagement?" He managed to keep his voice steady with an effort.

M. de La Tour d’Azyr bowed his handsome head, his eyes on the shining wooden floor. "With myself," he answered quietly. He already felt a tightening in his heart, knowing his answer would cause dismay. He heard a faint cry from Aline and saw M. de Kercadiou recoil suddenly. Then he launched into the explanation he felt was necessary.

"Considering his connection to you, M. de Kercadiou, and because of my deep respect for you, I did my best to avoid this. As you'll understand, the death of my dear friend and cousin Chabrillane seemed to demand action from me. I also knew my caution was starting to draw criticism from my friends. But yesterday, this wild young man made further restraint impossible. He provoked me deliberately and publicly. He inflicted the gravest insult upon me. So, tomorrow morning in the Bois, we meet."

He faltered slightly at the end, fully aware of the hostile atmosphere that now surrounded him. He had expected M. de Kercadiou's hostility, given the change in his manner earlier. However, the young lady's hostility came as more of a surprise.

He began to understand the difficulties his chosen path would create for him. A new obstacle was about to be thrown across the path he thought he had just cleared. Yet, his pride and his belief in the justice that needed to be served allowed for no weakening.

He realized with bitterness, as he looked from uncle to niece, that even if he killed André-Louis tomorrow, André-Louis would still take vengeance on him through his death. His gaze, usually so direct and bold, was now oddly furtive. He had not exaggerated in concluding that André-Louis Moreau was the evil genius of his life. He saw now that no matter what he did, even if he killed him, he could never truly conquer him. André-Louis Moreau would always have the last word. He understood this with bitterness, rage, and humiliation, a feeling almost unknown to him. This realization hardened his resolve, even though he saw its futility.

Outwardly, he appeared calm and composed, like a man regretfully accepting the inevitable. It would have been impossible to criticize his demeanor or to dissuade him from his commitment. M. de Kercadiou understood this.

"My God!" he whispered, almost a groan.

M. de La Tour d’Azyr, as always, did what good manners required. He took his leave. He understood that it would be impossible, even indecent, to stay where his news had caused such an impact. So he departed, filled with a bitterness that matched his former optimism. The sweet fruit of hope had turned to gall even as it touched his lips. Oh, yes, André-Louis Moreau would indeed always have the last word!

Uncle and niece looked at each other as he left, and horror filled both their eyes. Aline was almost deathly pale. Standing there, she wrung her hands as if in pain.

"Why didn't you ask him, beg him..." She broke off.

"To what purpose? He was in the right. And there are some things one cannot ask; things it would be a useless humiliation to ask." He sat down, groaning. "Oh, the poor boy, the poor, misguided boy."

You see, neither of them doubted the outcome. La Tour d’Azyr's calm confidence was infectious. He was no boastful man, and they knew how formidable he was generally considered as a swordsman.

"What does humiliation matter? A life is at stake, André's life."

"I know. My God, don't I know? I would humiliate myself if I thought it would help. But Azyr is a hard, relentless man, and..."

She left him abruptly.

She caught up with the Marquis just as he was getting into his carriage. He turned when she called and bowed.

"Mademoiselle?"

He immediately guessed her purpose. He anticipated the unparalleled bitterness of having to refuse her. Yet, at her invitation, he stepped back into the cool hall.

A carved black oak table stood in the middle of the black and white checkered marble floor. He stopped by it, leaning lightly against it, while she sat regally in the large crimson chair beside it.

She said, "Monsieur, I cannot let you leave like this. You cannot realize, monsieur, what a blow my uncle would suffer if... if something evil, something irrevocably evil, were to happen to his godson tomorrow. The things he said at first..."

"Mademoiselle, I understood their true meaning. Spare yourself. Believe me, I am deeply distressed by these unexpected circumstances. You must believe me when I say that. It is all I can say."

"Must that truly be all? André is very dear to his godfather."

Her pleading tone cut him like a knife. Then, suddenly, it stirred another emotion within him. He knew this emotion was utterly unworthy, almost defiling given his overwhelming pride of noble birth, yet he could not repress it. He hesitated to voice it, hesitated even to hint at such a horrible idea: that he might conceivably find a rival in a man of such humble origin. Yet, that sudden pang of jealousy was stronger than his immense pride.

"And to you, mademoiselle? What is this André-Louis Moreau to you? Please pardon the question, but I wish to understand clearly."

Watching her, he saw a scarlet blush spread across her face. At first, he interpreted it as confusion. Then, the gleam in her blue eyes revealed its source was anger. That comforted him. Since he had offended her, he felt reassured. It did not occur to him that her anger might have another cause.

"André and I have been playmates since childhood. He is very dear to me, too. I almost consider him a brother. If I ever needed help, and my uncle wasn't available, André would be the first person I'd turn to. Are you sufficiently answered, monsieur? Or is there more about me you wish to know?"

He bit his lip. He thought he must be unnerved this morning. Otherwise, the foolish suspicion that had offended her would never have crossed his mind.

He bowed very low. "Mademoiselle, please forgive me for troubling you with such a question. You have answered more fully than I could have hoped or wished."

He said nothing more. He waited for her to continue. Unsure what to do, she sat in silence for a while, a frown on her white brow, her fingers nervously drumming on the table. Finally, she confronted the calm, polished facade he presented.

"I have come, monsieur, to beg you to postpone this meeting."

She saw his dark eyebrows rise slightly, and a faint, regretful smile barely touched his fine lips. She hurried on. "What honor can you gain from such an engagement, monsieur?"

This was a shrewd jab at his racial pride, which she considered his strongest emotion. It had often led him into error just as much as it had driven him to do good.

"I do not seek honor in it, mademoiselle, but—I must say it—justice. The engagement, as I have explained, is not of my choosing. It has been forced upon me, and I cannot honorably withdraw."

"Why, what dishonor would there be in sparing him? Surely, monsieur, no one would question your courage? No one could misunderstand your motives."

"You are mistaken, mademoiselle. My motives would most certainly be misunderstood. You forget that this young man has gained a certain reputation in the past week, one that might well make a man hesitate to face him."

She dismissed that almost contemptuously, seeing it as a mere quibble.

"Some men, yes. But not you, Monsieur le Marquis."

Her confidence in him, in every way, was very flattering. But there was a bitterness beneath the sweetness.

"Even I, mademoiselle, let me assure you. And there is more to it than that. This quarrel, which Monsieur Moreau has forced upon me, is not new. It is merely the culmination of a long persecution..."

"Which you invited," she cut in. "Be fair, monsieur."

"I hope it is not in my nature to be otherwise, mademoiselle."

"Consider, then, that you killed his friend."

"I find nothing in that to reproach myself with. My justification lay in the circumstances; the subsequent events in this troubled country surely confirm it."

"And..." She faltered a little, looking away from him for the first time. "And that you... that you... And what about Mademoiselle Binet, whom he was going to marry?"

He stared at her for a moment in sheer surprise. "Was going to marry?" he repeated incredulously, almost dismayed.

"You did not know that?"

"But how do you know?"

"Did I not tell you that we are almost like brother and sister? I have his confidence. He told me, before... before you made it impossible."

He looked away, chin in hand, his gaze thoughtful, disturbed, almost wistful.

He said slowly and musingly, "There is a singular fate at work between that man and me, always bringing us, each in turn, across the other's path..."

He sighed, then turned to face her again, speaking more briskly. "Mademoiselle, until this moment I had no knowledge—no suspicion—of this. But..." He broke off, considered, and then shrugged. "If I wronged him, I did so unconsciously. It would surely be unfair to blame me. In all our actions, only the intention counts."

"But does it make no difference?"

"None that I can see, mademoiselle. It gives me no justification to withdraw from something I am irrevocably committed to. Indeed, no justification could ever be greater than my concern for the pain it would cause my good friend, your uncle, and perhaps yourself, mademoiselle."

She rose suddenly, confronting him directly. She was desperate now, driven to play the only card she thought she had.

"Monsieur," she said, "you did me the honor today to speak in certain terms; to... to hint at certain hopes with which you honor me."

He looked at her almost in fear. He waited in silence for her to continue, not daring to speak.

"I... I... Please understand, monsieur, that if you persist in this matter, if... unless you can break this engagement of yours tomorrow morning in the Bois, you are not to presume to mention this subject to me again, or, indeed, ever approach me again."

She could only hint at it in this indirect way. It was up to him to make the direct proposal, a door she had now opened wide.

“Mademoiselle, you cannot mean...”

“I do, monsieur. Please understand, it’s final.” He looked at her with eyes of misery, his handsome, manly face as pale as she had ever seen it. The hand he had been holding out in protest began to shake. He lowered it to his side again, so she wouldn't see it shaking. For a brief second, he fought an internal battle. His desires clashed with what he believed his honor demanded. He didn't realize how much his honor was actually fueled by a relentless need for revenge. He felt that retreating would be shameful, and shame was an unbearable torment to him. She asked too much. She couldn't possibly understand what she was asking, otherwise she wouldn't be so unreasonable, so unfair. But he also saw that trying to make her understand would be pointless.

It was the end. Even if he killed André-Louis Moreau in the morning, as he fiercely hoped to, the victory, even in death, would still belong to André-Louis Moreau.

He bowed deeply, his face as serious and sorrowful as his heart.

“Mademoiselle, my respects,” he murmured, and turned to go.

“But you have not answered me!” she called after him in terror.

He paused on the threshold and turned. From the cool, dim hall, she saw him as a black, graceful silhouette against the brilliant sunshine outside. This image of him would haunt her, a sinister and menacing memory, through the terrible hours that followed.

“What do you want, mademoiselle? I was only sparing us both the pain of a refusal.”

He was gone, leaving her crushed and furious. She sank back into the large red chair, sitting there slumped, her elbows on the table, her face buried in her hands. Her face burned with shame and passion. She had offered herself, and he had refused her! Something unimaginable had happened. The humiliation felt like a mark that could never be erased.

Startled and appalled, she stepped back, pressing her hand to her aching chest.
