[Chapter 3: President Le Chapelier]

The unrest in Paris, which for the next two days looked more like an armed camp than a city, delayed Bertrand des Amis's burial until that eventful Wednesday. Amid events that were shaking a nation to its foundations, the death of a fencing master went almost unnoticed, even among his students. Most of them did not come to the academy during the two days his body lay there. A few, however, did show up, and they spread the news to others. As a result, about twenty young men followed the master to Père Lachaise, with André-Louis walking at the front as the chief mourner.

As far as André-Louis knew, there were no relatives to inform. However, within a week of Monsieur des Amis's death, a sister arrived from Passy to claim his inheritance. It was a substantial amount, as the master had prospered and saved money. Most of it was invested in the Compagnie des Eaux and the National Debt. André-Louis handed her over to the lawyers and never saw her again.

Des Amis's death left André-Louis with such a deep sense of loneliness and desolation that he gave no thought or care to the sudden wealth it brought him. The master's sister might inherit the money he had saved, but André-Louis inherited the source of that wealth itself: the fencing school. By now, he was so well-established as an instructor there that its many students expected him to lead it successfully. And never had fencing academies seen such prosperity as in these troubled times, when every man was sharpening his sword and learning how to use it.

It wasn't until a couple of weeks later that André-Louis truly understood what had happened to him. By then, he was an exhausted man, having done the work of two during that fortnight. If he hadn't come up with the clever idea of pairing off his more advanced students to fence with each other, while he stood by to criticize, correct, and instruct, he would have found the task utterly beyond his strength. Even so, he still had to fence about six hours daily. Each day, he carried over the weariness from the day before, until he was in danger of collapsing under the increasing burden of fatigue. Eventually, he hired an assistant to handle the beginners, who required the most effort. He found one easily enough, by good fortune, in one of his own students named Le Duc. As summer progressed and the number of students steadily grew, he needed to hire yet another assistant, an able young instructor named Galoche, and rent another room on the floor above.

These were strenuous days for André-Louis, more strenuous than any he had known, even when he was building up the Binet Company. But it also meant they were days of extraordinary prosperity. He regretfully noted that Bertrand des Amis had died by ill chance on the very eve of such a profitable surge in sword-play.

The crest of the Académie du Roi, to which André-Louis had no official right, still hung outside his door. He had overcome this problem in a way worthy of Scaramouche. He left the escutcheon and the inscription, "Académie de Bertrand des Amis, Maître en fait d'Armes des Académies du Roi," adding another line below it: "Conducted by André-Louis."

With little time now to go out, André-Louis learned about the revolutionary changes around him from his students and the newspapers. A flood of newspapers had appeared in Paris with the establishment of a free press. He learned that, as a somewhat anticlimactic follow-up, the Bastille had fallen. That event had happened while Monsieur des Amis lay dead, the day before his burial, and it was indeed the main reason for the delay. The fall of the Bastille was inspired by Prince Lambesc's ill-considered charge, which had killed the fencing master.

The outraged people had besieged the electors in the Hôtel de Ville, demanding weapons to defend themselves from foreign murderers hired by despotism. In the end, the electors agreed to give them arms, or rather, since they had none to give, to allow them to arm themselves. They also gave them a cockade of red and blue, the colors of Paris. Because these colors were also those of the Duke of Orleans's liveries, white was added to them, the white of France's ancient standard. Thus, the tricolor was born. Furthermore, a permanent committee of electors was appointed to oversee public order.

Empowered in this way, the people worked so effectively that within thirty-six hours, sixty thousand pikes had been forged. At nine o'clock on Tuesday morning, thirty thousand men stood before the Invalides. By eleven o'clock, they had stripped it of its store of arms, amounting to some thirty thousand muskets, while others had seized the Arsenal and taken possession of its powder.

They prepared to resist the attack that was to be launched from seven points upon the city that evening. But Paris didn't wait for the attack. It took the initiative. Mad with enthusiasm, it conceived the insane project of taking that terrible, menacing fortress, the Bastille. What's more, as you know, it succeeded before five o'clock that night, aided in the enterprise by the French Guards with cannon.

The news of it, carried to Versailles by Lambesc fleeing with his dragoons before the vast armed force that had sprouted from the paving stones of Paris, made the Court pause. The people now possessed the guns captured from the Bastille. They were erecting barricades in the streets and mounting these guns on them. The attack had been delayed too long. It had to be abandoned, as it could now only lead to fruitless slaughter that would further shake the already severely damaged prestige of Royalty.

And so the Court, momentarily regaining wisdom under the spur of fear, chose to temporize. Necker should be brought back once again, and the three orders should sit united, as the National Assembly demanded. It was the most complete surrender of force to force, the only argument left. The King went alone to inform the National Assembly of that eleventh-hour decision, much to the comfort of its members, who viewed the dreadful state of affairs in Paris with pain and alarm. "No force but the force of reason and argument" was their watchword, and it would remain so for two more years, with a patience and fortitude in the face of ceaseless provocation that has not been sufficiently acknowledged.

As the King was leaving the Assembly, a woman, embracing his knees, voiced what might well have been the question of all France: "Ah, sire, are you really sincere? Are you sure they will not make you change your mind?"

Yet no such question was asked a couple of days later when the King, alone and unguarded except for the representatives of the Nation, came to Paris to complete the peacemaking, the surrender of Privilege. The Court was filled with terror by this adventure. Were these mutinous Parisians not the "enemy"? And should a King go among his enemies like this? If he shared some of that fear, as his somber mood might lead us to suppose, he must have found it groundless. What if two hundred thousand armed men, men without uniforms and with the most extraordinary assortment of weapons ever seen, awaited him? They awaited him as a guard of honor.

Mayor Bailly presented him with the keys of the city at the barrier. "These are the same keys that were presented to Henri 4," he said. "He had reconquered his people. Now the people have reconquered their King."

At the Hôtel de Ville, Mayor Bailly offered him the new cockade, the tricolored symbol of constitutional France. After the King had given his royal confirmation to the formation of the Garde Bourgeoise and to the appointments of Bailly and Lafayette, he departed again for Versailles amid shouts of "Vive le Roi!" from his loyal people.

And now you see Privilege, as it were, submitting at last, before the cannon's mouth. If they had submitted sooner, they might have saved oceans of blood, chiefly their own. Nobles and clergy now came to join the National Assembly, to work with it on this constitution that was meant to regenerate France. But the reunion was a mockery, as much a mockery as the Archbishop of Paris singing the Te Deum for the fall of the Bastille. It was the most grotesque and incredible of all these grotesque and incredible events. All that had happened to the National Assembly was that it had introduced five or six hundred enemies to hamper and hinder its discussions.

But all this is an oft-told tale, to be read in detail elsewhere. I give you here only as much of it as I have found in André-Louis's own writings, almost in his own words, reflecting the changes that took place in his mind. Silent now, he came to fully believe in those things he had not believed when he had preached them earlier.

Meanwhile, along with the change in his fortune came a change in his legal standing, a change brought about by the other transformations happening around him. He no longer needed to hide. Who, in these days, would bring against him the grotesque charge of sedition for what he had done in Brittany? What court would dare to send him to the gallows for having said in advance what all France was saying now? As for that other possible charge of murder, who would concern himself with the death of the miserable Binet, killed by him, if indeed he had killed him, as he hoped, in self-defense?

So, one fine day in early August, André-Louis took a holiday from the academy, which was now running smoothly under his assistants. He hired a chaise and drove out to Versailles to the Café d'Amaury. He knew it as the meeting place of the Club Breton, the seed from which would spring the Society of the Friends of the Constitution, better known as the Jacobins. He went to find Le Chapelier, who had been one of the club's founders. Le Chapelier was now a man of great prominence, president of the Assembly during this important season when it was deliberating upon the Declaration of the Rights of Man.

Le Chapelier's importance was reflected in the sudden servility of the shirt-sleeved, white-aproned waiter from whom André-Louis inquired about the representative.

Monsieur Le Chapelier was upstairs with friends. The waiter wished to serve the gentleman but hesitated to interrupt the gathering where Monsieur le Député was present.

André-Louis gave him a piece of silver to encourage him to try. Then he sat down at a marble-topped table by the window, looking out over the wide, tree-encircled square. There, in that common room of the café, deserted at this mid-afternoon hour, the great man came to him. Less than a year ago, Le Chapelier had yielded precedence to André-Louis in a matter of delicate leadership. Today, he stood on the heights, one of the great leaders of the Nation in travail, while André-Louis was deep down in the shadows of the general populace.

The thought was in both their minds as they scanned each other, each noting the marked changes that a few months had brought. In Le Chapelier, André-Louis observed certain heightened refinements of dress that matched subtler refinements in his face. He was thinner than before, his face pale, and there was a weariness in the eyes that regarded his visitor through a gold-rimmed spyglass. In André-Louis, those jaded but quick-moving eyes of the Breton deputy noted even more significant changes. The almost constant swordsmanship of these last months had given André-Louis a grace of movement, a poise, and a curious, indefinable air of dignity, of command. He seemed taller because of this, and he was dressed with an elegance that, though understated, was nonetheless rich. He wore a small silver-hilted sword, and wore it as if accustomed to it. His black hair, which Le Chapelier had only ever seen fluttering lank about his bony cheeks, was now glossy and gathered into a club. He almost had the air of a petit-maître.

In both men, however, the changes were purely superficial, as each was soon to reveal to the other. Le Chapelier was still the same direct and straightforward Breton, abrupt in manner and speech. He stood smiling for a moment in mingled surprise and pleasure, then opened his arms wide. They embraced under the awe-stricken gaze of the waiter, who immediately made himself scarce.

"André-Louis, my friend! Where do you come from?"

"We drop from above. I come from below to observe closely one who is on the heights."

You're at the top! But if you had wanted it, you could be standing in my place right now.

I don't do well with heights, and I find the atmosphere up here too thin. Honestly, you don't look so good yourself, Isaac. You're pale.

The Assembly was in session all last night. That's all. These damned Privileged just keep multiplying our difficulties. They'll continue to do so until we officially abolish them.

They sat down. "Abolition! You're considering such a drastic step? Not that you surprise me. You've always been an extremist."

I'm considering it to save them. I want to abolish them officially, to save them from a different kind of abolition at the hands of a people they've exasperated.

I see. And the King?

The King is the symbol of the Nation. We will free him, along with the Nation, from the chains of Privilege. Our constitution will achieve this. Do you agree?

André-Louis shrugged. "Does it matter? I'm a dreamer in politics, not a man of action. Until recently, I've been very moderate, more moderate than you think. But now, I'm almost a republican. I've been watching, and I've realized that this King is just nothing, a puppet who dances at the whim of whoever pulls his strings."

This King, you say? What other king is possible? You're surely not one of those who dream about Orleans taking power? He has a sort of party, a following largely recruited by the popular hatred of the Queen and the known fact that she hates him. Some have even thought of making him regent, some even more; Robespierre is among them.

"Who?" André-Louis asked, as he didn't know the name.

Robespierre, an absurd little lawyer who represents Arras. He's a shabby, clumsy, timid bore who makes nasal speeches that nobody listens to. He's an ultra-royalist whom the royalists and the Orleanists are using for their own ends. He has persistence, and he insists upon being heard. He might be listened to someday. But for him, or the others, to ever make anything of Orleans... Rubbish! Orleans himself might want it, but the man is a eunuch when it comes to crime; he wants to, but he can't. That phrase is Mirabeau's.

He broke off to ask André-Louis for his news.

"You didn't treat me as a friend when you wrote to me," he complained. "You gave me no clue to your whereabouts. You claimed you were on the verge of destitution and withheld from me the means to come to your assistance. I've been worried about you, André. Yet, judging by your appearance, I might have saved myself that worry. You seem prosperous and confident. Tell me about it."

André-Louis told him everything frankly. The deputy said, "Do you know, you're an amazement to me? From a lawyer's robe to an actor's boots, and now from an actor's boots to a sword! What will become of you, I wonder?"

The gallows, probably.

Nonsense! Be serious. Why not the senator's toga in a senatorial France? It might be yours now if you had wanted it.

"That's the surest way to the gallows of all," André-Louis laughed.

At that moment, Le Chapelier showed impatience. I wonder if that phrase crossed his mind four years later when he himself rode in the death cart to the Place de Grève.

We are sixty-six Breton deputies in the Assembly. Should a vacancy occur, will you act as a suppleant? A word from me, along with the influence of your name in Rennes and Nantes, and it's done.

André-Louis laughed outright. "Do you know, Isaac, every time I see you, you try to push me into politics?"

Because you have a gift for politics. You were born for politics.

Ah, yes, Scaramouche in real life. I've played that role on stage. That's enough. Tell me, Isaac, what news of my old friend, La Tour d'Azyr?

He's here in Versailles, damn him, a thorn in the side of the Assembly. They've burned his chateau at La Tour d'Azyr. Unfortunately, he wasn't in it at the time. The flames haven't even singed his insolence. He dreams that when this philosophic aberration is over, there will be serfs to rebuild it for him.

"So there's been trouble in Brittany?" André-Louis had become suddenly serious, his thoughts turning to Gavrillac.

Plenty of it, and elsewhere too. Is it any surprise? These delays at such a time, with famine in the land? Chateaux have been burning down during the last fortnight. The peasants followed the lead of the Parisians and treated every castle as a Bastille. Order is being restored, there as here, and they are quieter now.

What about Gavrillac? Do you know?

I believe everything is well. Monsieur de Kercadiou was not a Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr. He was sympathetic to his people. It's unlikely they would harm Gavrillac. But don't you correspond with your godfather?

Given the circumstances, no. What you tell me would make it more difficult than ever now, for he must consider me one of those who helped light the torch that has set fire to so much belonging to his class. Please find out for me that everything is well, and let me know.

I will, at once.

At parting, when André-Louis was about to step into his cabriolet to return to Paris, he asked about something else.

“Do you happen to know if Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr has married?” he asked.

“I don’t,” Isaac replied. “Which probably means he hasn’t. We would certainly have heard if someone of his high standing had married.”

“Of course,” André-Louis said indifferently. “Goodbye, Isaac! You’ll come and see me at 13 Rue du Hasard. Come soon.”

“As soon and as often as my duties will allow. They keep me chained here at present.”

“Poor slave of duty with your gospel of liberty!”

“That’s true!” Isaac said. “And because of that, I will come. I have a duty to Brittany: to make Omnes Omnibus one of her representatives in the National Assembly.”

“That’s a duty you’d do me a favor by neglecting,” André-Louis laughed, and then drove away.
