CHAPTER 11. THE FRACAS AT THE THEATRE FEYDAU

Leaving his host to act as his representative with Mademoiselle de Kercadiou, and to explain his deep regret that forced him to leave without saying a proper goodbye, the Marquis drove away from Sautron, feeling utterly gloomy. Twenty-four hours with La Binet had been more than enough for a man of his refined and particular taste. He looked back on the whole affair with disgust. This was the inevitable psychological reaction. He marveled that he had found her so desirable just yesterday. He cursed himself for jeopardizing his chances of marrying Mademoiselle de Kercadiou, all for such a fleeting and worthless pleasure. His state of mind wasn't particularly unusual, so there's no need to explain it further. It stemmed from the constant conflict between the 'beast' and the 'angel' that exists within every man.

The Chevalier de Chabrillane, who served the Marquis almost like a gentleman-in-waiting, sat opposite him in the enormous traveling berline. A small folding table had been set up between them, and the Chevalier suggested a game of piquet. But the Marquis was not in the mood for cards. He was lost in thought. As they rattled over the cobblestones of Nantes' streets, he remembered promising La Binet he would see her performance that night in "The Faithless Lover." Now, he was running away from her. The thought was disgusting to him for two reasons. He was breaking his word and acting like a coward. And there was more to it than that. He had led the mercenary little strumpet, and he thought of her that way now with some justification, to expect favors from him in addition to the lavish gifts he had already given her. That hussy had almost tried to strike a bargain with him about her future. He was to take her to Paris, set her up in her own furnished place, as the saying went and still goes, and, under his powerful protection, ensure that the doors of the capital's great theaters would open to her talents. He hadn't exactly committed himself, he was thankful to realize. But he hadn't definitively refused her either. Now, he had to come to an understanding. He was forced to choose between his trivial passion for her, a passion already extinguished, and his deep, almost spiritual devotion to Mademoiselle de Kercadiou.

His honor, he believed, demanded that he immediately free himself from this false position. La Binet would make a scene, of course, but he knew the right remedy for that kind of hysteria. Money, after all, has its uses.

He pulled the cord. The carriage rolled to a standstill; a footman appeared at the door.

"To the Theatre Feydau," he said.

The footman vanished and the berline rolled on. Monsieur de Chabrillane laughed cynically.

The Marquis snapped, "I'll trouble you not to be amused. You don't understand." Then he explained himself. It was rare for him to condescend like this. But he couldn't bear to be misunderstood in such an important matter. Chabrillane grew serious, reflecting the Marquis's extreme seriousness.

"Why not write?" he suggested. "Personally, I confess I'd find it easier."

Nothing could better have revealed the Marquis's state of mind than his answer.

"Letters can be lost or misinterpreted. I won't take either of those risks. If she didn't answer, I'd never know which problem had occurred. And I won't have any peace of mind until I know I've put an end to this affair. The berline can wait while we're at the theater. We'll continue our journey afterward. We'll travel all night if necessary."

"Peste!" Monsieur de Chabrillane said with a grimace. But that was all.

The large traveling carriage pulled up at the brightly lit entrance of the Feydau, and the Marquis stepped out. He entered the theater with Chabrillane, unconsciously walking right into André-Louis's hands.

André-Louis was exasperated by Climene's long absence from Nantes in the Marquis's company. His anger was fueled by Monsieur Binet's unspeakable complacency regarding an event of unmistakable significance.

No matter how much he tried to adopt a stoic mindset, or judge with complete detachment, André-Louis was tormented and revolted deep in his heart and soul. He didn't blame Climene. He had been wrong about her. She was just a poor, weak person, helplessly driven by the first opportunity, no matter how unsavory, that promised her advancement. She suffered from the plague of greed. He congratulated himself on discovering this before making her his wife. Now, he felt nothing for her but a good deal of pity and some contempt. The pity came from the love she had recently inspired in him. It was like the dregs of love, all that remained after the powerful wine had been drained. He reserved his anger for her father and her seducer.

The thoughts stirring in him that Monday morning, when it was discovered that Climene had not yet returned from her excursion the previous day in the Marquis's coach, were already wicked enough. They didn't need the additional spurring they received from the distraught Leandre.

Up until now, these two men had regarded each other with mutual contempt. This phenomenon is often seen in similar situations. Now, what seemed like a shared misfortune brought them into a kind of alliance. At least, that's how it seemed to Leandre when he went looking for André-Louis, who was calmly smoking a pipe on the quay directly in front of the inn.

"Name of a pig!" Leandre exclaimed. "How can you take your ease and smoke at such a time?"

Scaramouche looked up at the sky. He said, "I don't find it too cold. The sun is shining. I'm very well here."

"Do I talk of the weather?" Leandre was very excited.

"Of what, then?"

"Of Climene, of course."

"Oh! The lady has ceased to interest me," he lied.

Leandre stood squarely in front of him, a handsome figure, handsomely dressed for the times. His hair was well powdered, and he wore silk stockings. His face was pale; his large eyes seemed larger than usual.

"Ceased to interest you? Are you not to marry her?"

André-Louis exhaled a cloud of smoke. "You can't mean to be offensive. Yet you almost suggest that I live on other men's leavings."

Leandre, overcome, exclaimed, "My God!" He stared for a moment. Then he burst out again. "Are you completely heartless? Are you always Scaramouche?"

"What do you expect me to do?" André-Louis asked, showing faint surprise in his own turn.

"I do not expect you to let her go without a struggle."

"But she has gone already." André-Louis puffed on his pipe for a moment. Leandre clenched and unclenched his hands in helpless rage. "What's the point of fighting what's bound to happen? Did you fight when I took her from you?"

"She wasn't mine for you to take. I only hoped, and you won the race. But even if it had been different, how can you compare the two? That was a matter of honor. This... this is hell."

Leandre's emotion touched André-Louis. He took Leandre's arm. "You're a good fellow, Leandre. I'm glad I stepped in to save you from your fate."

"Oh, you don't love her!" Leandre cried passionately. "You never did. You don't know what it means to love, or you wouldn't talk like this. My God! If she had been my fiancée and this had happened, I would have killed the man. Killed him! Do you hear me? But you... Oh, you just come out here and smoke, and get some air, and talk about her as another man's leftovers. I'm surprised I didn't hit you for saying that."

He tore his arm from André-Louis's grip. He looked almost as if he would strike him right then.

"You should have done it," André-Louis said. "It's in your part."

With a curse, Leandre turned to leave. André-Louis stopped him.

"A moment, my friend. Think about it yourself. Would you marry her now?"

"Would I?" The young man's eyes blazed with passion. "Would I? Let her say she'll marry me, and I'll be her slave."

"Slave is the right word. A slave in hell."

"It would never be hell to me where she was, no matter what she had done. I love her, man. I'm not like you. I love her, do you hear me?"

"I've known it for some time," André-Louis said. "Though I didn't suspect your attack of the disease would be quite so violent. Well, God knows I loved her too, quite enough to share your thirst for killing. For me, the blue blood of La Tour d'Azyr would hardly quench this thirst. I'd like to add to it the dirty fluid that flows in the veins of the unspeakable Binet."

For a second, his emotion had gotten out of hand. In the biting tone of those last words, he revealed to Leandre something of the fires burning under his icy exterior. The young man caught his hand.

"I knew you were acting," Leandre said. "You feel... you feel as I do."

"Look at us, partners in viciousness. I've betrayed myself, it seems. Well, what now? Do you want to see this pretty Marquis torn limb from limb? I might give you that spectacle."

"What?" Leandre stared, wondering if this was another of Scaramouche's cynical remarks.

"It isn't really difficult, provided I have help. I only need a little. Will you lend it to me?"

"Anything you ask!" Leandre exploded. "My life, if you need it."

André-Louis took his arm again. "Let's walk," he said. "I'll instruct you."

When they came back, the company was already at dinner. Mademoiselle had not yet returned. A sullen mood hung over the table. Columbine and Madame looked anxious. The fact was, relations between Binet and his troupe were growing more strained every day.

André-Louis and Leandre each went to their usual places. Binet's small eyes followed them with a malicious gleam. His thick lips pouted into a crooked smile.

"You two have grown very friendly all of a sudden," he mocked.

"You are a man of discernment, Binet," Scaramouche said. The cold loathing in his voice was an insult in itself. "Perhaps you discern the reason?"

"It's easily discerned."

"Entertain the company with it!" he begged, and waited. "What? You hesitate? Is it possible that there are limits to your shamelessness?"

Binet lifted his great head. "Do you want to quarrel with me, Scaramouche?" Thunder rumbled in his deep voice.

"Quarrel? You must be joking. A man doesn't quarrel with creatures like you. We all know the place complacent husbands hold in public esteem. But, in God's name, what place is there at all for complacent fathers?"

Binet heaved himself up, a great towering mass of a man. He violently shook off the restraining hand of Pierrot, who sat on his left.

"A thousand devils!" he roared. "If you take that tone with me, I'll break every bone in your filthy body."

"If you were to lay a finger on me, Binet, you would give me the only provocation I still need to kill you." André-Louis was as calm as ever, which made him even more menacing. Alarm stirred among the company. He pulled the butt of a newly purchased pistol from his pocket. "I go armed, Binet. It's only fair to warn you. Provoke me as you've suggested, and I'll kill you with no more hesitation than I would kill a slug. After all, that's what you most resemble: a slug, Binet; a fat, slimy body; foulness without soul and without intelligence. Now that I think about it, I can't stand to sit at this table with you. It turns my stomach."

He pushed his plate away and stood up. "I'll go eat in the common dining room downstairs."

Columbine immediately jumped up.

"And I'll come with you, Scaramouche!" she cried.

It was like a signal. Even if they had planned it, it couldn't have happened more perfectly. Binet, in fact, was convinced it was a conspiracy. Leander followed Columbine, then Polichinelle followed Leander, and soon everyone else left too. Binet found himself sitting alone at the head of an empty table in an empty room. He was badly shaken, and his rage offered no comfort against the sudden fear that gripped him.

He sat down to think things over. He was still deep in thought about half an hour later when his daughter finally returned from her outing and entered the room.

She looked pale, even a little scared. In reality, she was extremely self-conscious, knowing she had to face everyone.

Seeing only her father in the room, she paused at the doorway.

She asked, "Where is everybody?" Her voice sounded natural, but only with effort.

Monsieur Binet lifted his large head and turned his bloodshot eyes on her. He scowled, puffed out his thick lips, and made harsh noises in his throat. Still, he took her in: so graceful and lovely, looking completely like a lady of fashion in her long, fur-trimmed, bottle-green traveling coat, her muff, and her wide hat adorned with a sparkling rhinestone buckle above her beautifully styled brown hair. He had no need to fear the future as long as he had such a daughter. Let Scaramouche play whatever tricks he wanted.

However, he didn't voice any of these comforting thoughts.

He growled in greeting, "So you're back at last, little fool. I was starting to wonder if we'd even perform this evening. It wouldn't have surprised me much if you hadn't returned in time. In fact, since you've chosen to play the excellent hand you were dealt in your own way, ignoring my advice, nothing can surprise me."

She crossed the room to the table. Leaning against it, she looked down at him almost disdainfully.

She said, "I have nothing to regret."

He replied, "Every fool says that at first. And you wouldn't admit it even if you did. That's just how you are. You go your own way, despite advice from older, wiser heads. Good heavens, girl, what do you know of men?"

She reminded him, "I am not complaining."

He retorted, "No, but you might be soon. You'll discover you would have done better to be guided by your old father. As long as your Marquis was pining for you, there was nothing you couldn't have done with that fool. As long as you only let him kiss your fingertips... ah, good heavens! That was the time to secure your future. You'll never have such a chance again, not if you live to be a thousand. And you've squandered it, for what?"

Mademoiselle sat down. With disgust, she said, "You're sordid."

He asked, "Sordid, am I?" His thick lips curled again. "I've had enough of the lowest life, and I thought you had too. You had a hand that could have won you a fortune if you'd played it as I told you. Well, you've played it, and where's the fortune? We can wish for that as a sailor wishes for wind. And, by Heaven, we'll need to wish for it soon if the mood in the troupe continues like this. That scoundrel Scaramouche has been playing his mischievous tricks on them. They've suddenly become moral. They won't sit at the table with me anymore." He was sputtering, caught between anger and sardonic amusement. "It was your friend Scaramouche who set them that example. He actually threatened my life! Threatened my life! Called me... Oh, but what does that matter? What matters is that the next thing to happen to us will be the Binet Troupe discovering it can manage without Monsieur Binet and his daughter. This villainous bastard I befriended has slowly robbed me of everything. Today, it's in his power to rob me of my troupe. And the scoundrel is ungrateful and vile enough to use that power."

Mademoiselle said contemptuously, "Let him."

He was aghast. "Let him? And what will become of us?"

She said, "In any case, the Binet Troupe won't interest me much longer. I'll be going to Paris soon. There are better theaters there than the Feydau. There's Mademoiselle Montansier's theater in the Palais Royal; there's the Ambigu Comique; there's the Comédie Française; there's even a possibility I may have a theater of my own."

For once, his eyes grew wide. He stretched out a fat hand and placed it on one of hers. She noticed it trembled.

He asked, "Has he promised that? Has he promised?"

She looked at him, her head tilted to one side, her eyes sly, and a strange little smile on her perfect lips.

She answered with conviction, "He did not refuse me when I asked it." She was certain everything was as she desired.

He withdrew his hand and heaved himself up. Disgust was clear on his face. "Bah! He did not refuse!" he mocked her. Then, with passion, he added, "If you had acted as I advised you, he would have agreed to anything you asked. What's more, he would have provided anything you asked—anything within his means, and his means are inexhaustible. You've changed a certainty into a possibility, and I hate possibilities! Good heavens! I've lived on possibilities, and I've come infernally close to starving on them."

If she had known about the interview happening at that very moment at the Chateau de Sautron, she would have laughed less confidently at her father's gloomy predictions. But she was destined never to know, which was truly the cruelest punishment of all. She would attribute all the sudden evil that overwhelmed her—the shattering of all her future hopes based on the Marquis and the swift collapse of the Binet Troupe—to the wicked interference of that villain, Scaramouche.

She had some justification for this. Possibly, without Monsieur de Sautron's warning, the Marquis would have found enough reason in the evening's events at the Theatre Feydau to end an entanglement that brought too much unpleasant excitement. Meanwhile, the breakup of the Binet Troupe was most certainly the result of André-Louis's actions. But it was not a result he intended or even foresaw.

This was so true that during the interval after the second act, he went to the dressing room shared by Polichinelle and Rhodomont. Polichinelle was in the middle of changing.

He said, "I shouldn't bother to change. The play isn't likely to go beyond my opening scene of the next act with Leander."

“What do you mean?”

“You’ll see.” He placed a paper on Polichinelle’s table, among the grease-paints. “Take a look at this. It’s a kind of last will and testament for the troupe. I was a lawyer once, so the document is in order. I’m giving all of you the share produced by my partnership in the company.”

“But you don’t mean you’re leaving us?” Polichinelle cried in alarm. Rhodomont’s sudden stare asked the same question.

Scaramouche’s shrug was eloquent. Polichinelle continued gloomily, “Of course, we should have seen this coming. But why should you be the one to go? You’re the one who made us. You’re the real head and brains of this troupe. You’re the one who turned us into a real theatrical company. If anyone has to go, let it be Binet, Binet and his infernal daughter. Or if you go, good heavens, we all go with you!”

“Yes,” added Rhodomont, “we’ve had enough of that fat scoundrel.”

“I had thought of it, of course,” André-Louis said. “For once, it wasn't vanity; it was trust in your friendship. After tonight, we may consider it again, if I survive.”

“If you survive?” both cried.

Polichinelle got up. “Now, what madness have you in mind?” he asked.

“For one thing, I think I am indulging Leandre. For another, I am pursuing an old quarrel.”

The three knocks sounded as he spoke.

“There, I must go. Keep that paper, Polichinelle. After all, it may not be necessary.”

He was gone. Rhodomont stared at Polichinelle. Polichinelle stared at Rhodomont.

“What the devil is he thinking of?” the latter asked.

“We can find that out most readily by going to see,” replied Polichinelle. He quickly finished changing, despite what Scaramouche had said, and then followed with Rhodomont.

As they approached the wings, a roar of applause met them from the audience. It was applause and something else, applause with an unusual intensity. As it faded away, they heard Scaramouche’s voice ringing clear as a bell:

“And so you see, my dear M. Leandre, that when you speak of the Third Estate, it is necessary to be more explicit. What precisely is the Third Estate?”

“Nothing,” said Leandre.

There was a gasp from the audience, audible in the wings. Then Scaramouche’s next question swiftly followed:

“True. Sadly! But what should it be?”

“Everything,” said Leandre.

The audience roared its acclamations, even more violent because the reply was so unexpected.

“True again,” said Scaramouche. “And what’s more, that’s what it will be. That’s what it already is. Do you doubt it?”

“I hope it,” said the well-rehearsed Leandre.

“You may believe it,” said Scaramouche, and again the acclamations rolled into thunder.

Polichinelle and Rhodomont exchanged glances. Indeed, the former winked, with a hint of amusement.

“Good heavens!” growled a voice behind them. “Is the scoundrel at his political tricks again?”

They turned to confront M. Binet. Moving with his noiseless footsteps, he had come up unheard behind them. He stood there now in his scarlet Pantaloon suit, wearing a trailing bedgown over it, his little eyes glaring from either side of his false nose. But their attention was held by Scaramouche’s voice. He had stepped to the front of the stage.

“He doubts it,” he told the audience. “But then, this M. Leandre is himself like those who worship the worm-eaten idol of Privilege. So he’s a little afraid to believe a truth that’s becoming apparent to all the world. Shall I convince him? Shall I tell him how a company of noblemen, backed by their armed servants, six hundred men in all, sought to dictate to the Third Estate of Rennes a few short weeks ago? Must I remind him of the show of force displayed on that occasion by the Third Estate, and how they swept the streets clean of that rabble of nobles, *cette canaille noble*...”

Applause interrupted him. The phrase had struck home and resonated. Those who had suffered under that infamous label from their superiors eagerly embraced this turning of it against the nobles themselves.

“But let me tell you about their leader, *le plus noble de cette canaille, ou bien le plus canaille de ces nobles*! You know him, that one. He fears many things, but the voice of truth he fears most. For people like him, an eloquently spoken truth is something that must be silenced instantly. So he gathered his peers and their armed retainers, and led them out to slaughter these miserable bourgeois who dared to speak up. But these same miserable bourgeois did not choose to be slaughtered in the streets of Rennes. It occurred to them that since the nobles decreed that blood should flow, it might as well be the nobles’ blood. They gathered themselves too, this noble rabble against the rabble of nobles. And they gathered themselves so well that they drove M. de La Tour d’Azyr and his warlike following from the field, with broken heads and shattered delusions. They sought shelter from the Cordeliers. The monks gave them sanctuary in their convent, among those who survived was their proud leader, M. de La Tour d’Azyr. You have heard of this valiant Marquis, this great lord of life and death?”

The pit erupted in an uproar for a moment. It quieted again as Scaramouche continued:

“Oh, it was quite a sight to see this mighty hunter scurrying for cover like a hare, hiding away in the Cordelier Convent. Rennes hasn't seen him since. Rennes would certainly like to see him again. But if he is brave, he is also very discreet. And where do you think he has taken refuge, this great nobleman who wanted to see the streets of Rennes washed in the blood of its citizens? This man would have butchered old and young of the contemptible canaille just to silence the voice of reason and liberty that dares to ring through France today. Where do you think he hides himself? Why, right here in Nantes.”

Again, an uproar erupted.

“What do you say? Impossible? Why, my friends, at this very moment he is right here in this theater. He's skulking up there in that box. He's too shy to show himself. Oh, he's a very modest gentleman. But there he is, behind the curtains. Won't you show yourself to your friends, Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr, Monsieur le Marquis, who considers eloquence such a very dangerous gift? See, they would like a word with you. They don't believe me when I tell them that you are here.”

Now, whatever his true nature, and whatever André-Louis's opinions on the matter, Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr was certainly not a coward. It wasn't true to say he was hiding in Nantes. He came and went there openly and without shame. It so happened, however, that the people of Nantes were unaware of his presence among them until this moment. But then, he would have disdained to inform them of it, just as he would have disdained to conceal it from them.

Challenged in this way, however, and despite the ominous response from the bourgeois element in the audience to Scaramouche’s appeal to their passions, and despite Chabrillane's attempts to restrain him, the Marquis swept aside the curtain at the side of the box. He suddenly showed himself, pale but self-contained and scornful. He surveyed first the daring Scaramouche, and then those others who, at the sight of him, had given voice to their hostility.

Hoots and yells assailed him. Fists were shaken at him, and canes were brandished menacingly.

“Assassin! Scoundrel! Coward! Traitor!”

But he braved the storm, smiling at them with his ineffable contempt. He was waiting for the noise to stop. He was waiting to address them in his turn. But he waited in vain, as he very soon realized.

The contempt he didn't bother to hide only served to goad them on.

In the pit, pandemonium was already raging. Blows were being freely exchanged. There were scuffling groups, and here and there, swords were being drawn. Fortunately, though, the crowd was too dense to allow them to be used effectively. Those who had women with them, and those who were timid by nature, hurried to leave a place that looked like it was becoming a cockpit. Chairs were being smashed to provide weapons, and parts of chandeliers were already being used as missiles.

One of these, hurled by a gentleman in one of the boxes, narrowly missed Scaramouche where he stood. He looked down in a sort of grim triumph upon the havoc his words had caused. Knowing how inflammable the audience was, he had deliberately thrown down among them the lighted torch of discord to create this conflagration.

He saw men quickly forming into groups, representing one side or the other of this great quarrel that was already beginning to agitate all of France. Their rallying cries rang through the theater.

“Down with the canaille!” some shouted.

“Down with the privileged!” others cried.

And then, above the general din, one cry rang out sharply and insistently:

“To the box! Death to the butcher of Rennes! Death to La Tour d’Azyr, who makes war upon the people!”

There was a rush for one of the pit's doors, which opened onto the staircase leading to the boxes.

And now, while battle and confusion spread with the speed of fire, overflowing from the theater into the street itself, La Tour d’Azyr’s box had become the main target of the bourgeoisie's attack. It had also become the rallying ground for any gentlemen present in the theater, and for those who, though not of noble birth themselves, were still attached to the party of the nobles.

La Tour d’Azyr had left the front of the box to meet those who came to join him. Meanwhile, in the pit, one group of infuriated gentlemen tried to reach the stage across the empty orchestra. They wanted to deal with the audacious comedian responsible for this explosion. However, they found themselves opposed and held back by another group, made up of men whose feelings André-Louis had just expressed.

Perceiving this, and remembering the chandelier, he turned to Leander, who had remained beside him.

“I think it’s time to be going,” he said.

Leander, looking ghastly under his paint, was appalled by the storm. It far exceeded anything his unimaginative brain could have imagined. He gurgled an inarticulate agreement. But it looked as if they were already too late, for at that moment, they were assailed from behind.

Monsieur Binet had finally succeeded in breaking past Polichinelle and Rhodomont, who had been trying to restrain him given his murderous rage. Half a dozen gentlemen, regulars of the green-room, had come around to the stage. They intended to disembowel the knave who had created this riot. It was they who had flung aside the two comedians clinging to Binet. Now, they came after him, their swords drawn. But right behind them came Polichinelle, Rhodomont, Harlequin, Pierrot, Pasquariel, and Basque the artist. They were armed with whatever implements they could hastily snatch up, intent on saving the man with whom they sympathized despite everything, and in whom all their hopes were now centered.

Well ahead, Binet rolled, moving faster than anyone had ever seen him move, and swinging the long cane from which Pantaloon is inseparable.

“Infamous scoundrel!” he roared. “You have ruined me! But, name of a name, you will pay!”

André-Louis turned to face him. “You confuse cause with effect,” he said. But he got no farther. Binet’s cane, viciously driven, descended and broke upon his shoulder. If André-Louis had not moved swiftly aside as the blow fell, it would have struck him across the head and possibly stunned him. As he moved, he dropped his hand to his pocket. Swift upon the cracking of Binet’s breaking cane came the crack of the pistol with which André-Louis replied.

“You had your warning, you filthy pander!” he cried. And with that word, he shot him through the body.

Binet went down screaming, while the fierce Polichinelle, fiercer than ever in that moment of fierce reality, spoke quickly into André-Louis’s ear:

“Fool! So much wasn't necessary! Get out of here now, or you’ll leave your skin here! Get out of here!”

André-Louis thought it good advice and took it. The gentlemen who had charged onto the stage with Binet were partly held back by the actors' improvised weapons. They were also intimidated by the second pistol Scaramouche now held. So, they let him go.

He reached the wings, where he found himself facing a couple of sergeants from the watch. These sergeants were part of the police force already entering the theatre to restore order. Seeing them unpleasantly reminded him of his legal situation after tonight's events. He thought particularly of the bullet now lodged somewhere in Binet's large body. He flourished his pistol.

He threatened them, "Make way, or I'll burn your brains!" Intimidated because they had no firearms, they fell back and let him pass. He slipped past the green-room door, where the actresses had locked themselves in, waiting for the chaos to end. From there, he reached the street behind the theatre. It was deserted. He ran down the street, determined to reach the inn for clothes and money. He couldn't possibly travel in his Scaramouche costume.
