[Book 3 - Chapter 1: Transition]

Book 3: The Sword
Chapter 1: Transition

Andre-Louis wrote a letter from Paris to Le Chapelier. It still survives today. He wrote, "You might agree that it is a shame I had to permanently discard the Scaramouche costume. Clearly, there could be no outfit more fitting for me to wear. My role in life seems to always be stirring up conflict, and then slipping away before I am caught in the crash of the warring forces I provoked. It is a humiliating thought. I try to find comfort in the words of Epictetus. Do you ever read Epictetus? He says we are just actors in a play, and we must play whatever part the Director chooses to give us. However, it does not comfort me to have been cast in such a pathetic role. I find myself constantly excelling at the art of running away. But if I am not brave, at least I am cautious. So, where I lack one virtue, I can claim to possess another one almost too much. On a previous occasion, they wanted to hang me for speaking against the government. Should I have stayed to be hanged? This time they might want to hang me for several things, including murder. I do not know whether that scoundrel Binet is alive or dead from the lead bullet I shot into his fat stomach. I cannot say that I really care. If I have any hope at all in the matter, it is that he is dead and damned. But I am genuinely indifferent. My own problems are troubling me enough right now. I have nearly spent the little money I managed to hide on myself before I fled from Nantes on that terrible night. Both of the only two professions I know anything about are closed to me. I cannot find work in law or the theater without revealing myself as a man the executioner urgently wants. As things stand, it is very possible that I might die of hunger. This is especially true when you consider the current price of food in this starving city. Again, I turn to Epictetus for comfort. He says it is better to die of hunger, having lived without grief and fear, than to live with a troubled spirit in the middle of plenty. I seem likely to die in the condition he considers so desirable. The fact that it does not seem exactly desirable to me just proves that I am not a successful Stoic."

There is also another letter of his. He wrote it around the same time to the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr. Mr. Emile Quersac later published this letter in his book, "Undercurrents of the Revolution in Brittany." Quersac found it in the archives of Rennes. Mr. de Lesdiguieres had sent it there for legal purposes after receiving it from the Marquis.

"The Paris newspapers have reported the fight at the Feydau Theater in great detail," Andre-Louis wrote in this letter. "They also revealed the true identity of the Scaramouche who started it. The papers inform me that you have escaped the fate I planned for you when I stirred up that storm of public anger. I do not want you to find satisfaction in thinking that I regret your escape. I do not. I am glad about it. Dealing justice through death has a disadvantage. The victim has no knowledge that justice has caught up with him. If you had died, or been torn apart that night, I would now regret your eternal and peaceful sleep. The guilty should make amends in mental torment, not in a painless death. You see, I am not sure if hell is a certainty after this life, but I am very sure it can be a certainty in this life. I want you to keep living for a while longer so you can taste some of its bitterness.

"You murdered Philippe de Vilmorin because you feared his very dangerous gift of public speaking. I swore an oath that day that your evil act would be useless. I promised to make it so. I swore that the voice you murdered to silence would still ring like a trumpet through the country. That was my idea of revenge. Do you realize how I have been carrying it out? Do you know how I will continue to carry it out whenever I get the chance? I fired up the people of Rennes the day after that murder. Did you not hear the voice of Philippe de Vilmorin speaking his own ideas in my speech? He spoke with a fire and a passion greater than he could have ever commanded, because the goddess of revenge helped inflame me. In the voice of Omnes Omnibus at Nantes, you heard my voice again. I demanded the petition that destroyed your hopes of forcing the Third Estate to submit. Did you not hear the voice of Philippe de Vilmorin again? Did you not realize it was the mind of the man you murdered? His mind came back to life in me, his surviving friend. This made your useless armed attack last January necessary. Your aristocratic order was finally beaten and forced to hide in the Cordelier Convent. And that night, you were denounced to the people from the stage of the Feydau Theater. Did you not hear the voice of Philippe de Vilmorin yet again in the voice of Scaramouche? He used that dangerous gift of public speaking that you foolishly thought you could silence with a sword. It is becoming a persecution, isn't it? This voice from the grave insists on being heard. It will not rest until you have been thrown into the pit. By now, you will be regretting that you did not kill me too, just as I invited you to do on that occasion. I can imagine the bitterness of this regret, and I think about it with satisfaction. Regretting a missed opportunity is the worst hell a living soul can live in. This is especially true for a soul like yours. Because of this, I am glad to know you survived the riot at the Feydau Theater. At the time, I did not intend for you to survive. But because of this, I am glad you will live to feel anger and suffering in the shadow of your evil deed. You finally know that the voice of Philippe de Vilmorin will follow you. You did not have the intelligence to figure this out for yourself before. His voice will denounce you louder and more persistently. You will live in fear until you die in blood under the just anger that your victim's dangerous gift of public speaking is fueling against you."

I find it strange that he left out any mention of Miss Binet in this letter. I think it is somewhat dishonest that he blamed his actions at the Feydau Theater entirely on his self-imposed mission, and not at all on his hurt feelings over Climene.

Those two letters were both written in April of 1789. Their only immediate effect was to make the search for Andre-Louis Moreau much more active.

Le Chapelier wanted to find him to help him. He wanted to urge Andre-Louis once again to start a political career. The voters of Nantes would have found him every time a spot opened in their group. At least, they would have found Omnes Omnibus. They still did not know Omnes Omnibus and Andre-Louis were the same person. And the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr and Mr. de Lesdiguieres would have found him so they could send him to the gallows.

Mr. Binet was also looking for him with a very vengeful purpose. Binet had unfortunately recovered from his wound only to face total ruin. His theater group had abandoned him while he was sick. Polichinelle had reorganized the group, and it was now trying to continue successfully using the plans Andre-Louis had set up. The riot had stopped the Marquis from telling Miss Binet in person that he was ending their relationship. He was forced to write her a letter from Azyr a few days later to tell her. He softened the blow by including a bank draft for one hundred gold coins to pay off all his debts to her. However, it still almost crushed the unfortunate girl. It also allowed her father to make her angry when he recovered. He pointed out that she brought this upon herself by giving in to the Marquis too early, ignoring his sound practical advice. Both father and daughter naturally blamed the riot at the Feydau Theater for the Marquis abandoning her. They added that to the list of things they blamed Scaramouche for, and they had to bitterly admit the scoundrel had taken a superb revenge. Climene might have even started to think it would have been better for her to stay loyal to Scaramouche. She could have married him and trusted his obvious talents to take her to the top. Her ambition pushed her toward that peak, but it was now useless for her to hope for it. If she did think that, the thought itself must have been her sufficient punishment. As Andre-Louis so truly says, there is no worse hell than the regret for wasted opportunities.

Meanwhile, the intensely hunted Andre-Louis Moreau had completely disappeared for the time being. The active Paris police, pushed by the King's Lieutenant from Rennes, searched for him without success. Yet they could have found him in a house on the Rue du Hasard. This was very close to the Palais Royal. Pure chance had led him there.

The situation he described as a future possibility in his letter to Le Chapelier was, in fact, his current reality. He was completely broke. His money was gone, including what he got from selling any personal items he did not absolutely need.

His situation was so desperate one windy April morning. He was walking down the Rue du Hasard with the wind in his face, looking for any opportunity. He stopped to read a notice outside the door of a house on the left side of the street as you walk toward the Rue de Richelieu. There was no specific reason he went down the Rue du Hasard. Perhaps its name, which means chance, attracted him because it fit his situation.

The notice was written in large, round handwriting. It announced that Mr. Bertrand des Amis on the second floor needed a polite young man with some knowledge of sword fighting. Above this notice was a black rectangular board. On the board was a shield. In simple terms, it was red with two crossed swords and four lily symbols, one in each corner. Under the shield, golden letters spelled out the sign:

BERTRAND DES AMIS

Master of Arms of the King's Academies

Andre-Louis stood and thought about it. He felt he had the required skills. He was certainly young, and he believed he had good manners. The fencing lessons he took in Nantes had given him at least basic sword fighting skills. The notice looked like it had been pinned there for days. This suggested that not many people were applying for the job. In that case, perhaps Mr. Bertrand des Amis would not be too demanding. And anyway, Andre-Louis had not eaten for twenty-four hours. The exact nature of this job was still unclear, and it did not seem like something he would have chosen on purpose. But he was in no position to be picky now.

Also, he liked the name Bertrand des Amis. It pleasantly suggested both knightly honor and friendliness. The man's profession also had a hint of romance, so it was possible Mr. Bertrand des Amis would not ask too many questions.

In the end, he climbed the stairs to the second floor. He stopped on the landing outside a door. The door read "Academy of Mr. Bertrand des Amis." He pushed it open and walked into an empty, lightly furnished waiting room. From a room past a closed door, he heard feet stomping and the sharp scraping of steel hitting steel. Above these sounds, a loud, ringing voice was speaking. It was definitely French, but it was the kind of French you only hear in a fencing school.

"Slide it! Come on, slide it! Yes! Now the side thrust. And here is the counter-attack. Let us begin again. Come! The third defensive position. Make the cut, and then the fifth parry over the weapons. Oh, but stretch out! Stretch out! Lunge all the way!" the voice yelled in frustration. "Come, that was better." The swords stopped.

"Remember, keep your hand turned down and your elbow not too far out. That is enough for today. On Wednesday, we will see you practice against the wall. It is more controlled. Speed will come when you are more confident in the mechanics of the movements."

Another voice answered quietly. Footsteps moved away. The lesson was over. Andre-Louis knocked on the door.

A tall, thin, beautifully built man opened it. He looked about forty years old. He wore black silk pants and stockings, ending in light shoes. From the waist up, he was covered to his chin in a tight leather chest guard. His face was sharp and dark-skinned. He had large, dark eyes and a firm mouth. His thick black hair was tied back, and a few silver threads showed in it.

He held a fencing mask in the bend of his left arm. It was made of leather with a wire mesh to protect the eyes. He looked sharply at Andre-Louis from head to toe.

"Sir?" he asked politely.

It was obvious he misunderstood Andre-Louis's social standing. This was not surprising. Despite his terrible financial situation, his clothes looked perfect. Mr. des Amis could not have guessed that Andre-Louis was wearing everything he owned.

"You have a notice downstairs, sir," Andre-Louis said. The fencing master's eyes lit up quickly. Andre-Louis saw that he had been right. People were not exactly crowding the door to apply for the job. Then, that flash of satisfaction turned into a look of surprise.

"You came about that?"

Andre-Louis shrugged and gave a small smile. "A man must live," he said.

"Please come in. Sit down over there. I will be free to talk to you in a moment."

Andre-Louis sat on a bench against one of the white walls. The room was long and low, and the floor was completely bare. Simple wooden benches like the one he sat on were placed around the walls. The walls were covered with fencing decorations. There were masks, crossed training swords, stuffed chest guards, and many different swords, daggers, and small shields from various times and places. There was also a portrait of a fat man with a large nose. He wore a complicated curly wig and the blue ribbon of the Order of the Holy Spirit. Andre-Louis recognized him as the King. There was also a framed parchment document. It was Mr. des Amis's certificate from the King's Academy. A bookcase stood in one corner. Near it, facing the last of the four windows that filled the long room with light, was a small desk and an armchair. A chubby, beautifully dressed young gentleman stood by this desk. He was putting his coat and wig back on. Mr. des Amis walked over to him. Andre-Louis thought he moved with amazing grace and bounce. Des Amis talked with the young man while helping him finish getting dressed.

Finally, the young gentleman left. He wiped his face with a fine handkerchief that left a smell of perfume in the air. Mr. des Amis closed the door and turned to the applicant. Andre-Louis stood up immediately.

"Where have you studied?" the fencing master asked suddenly.

"Studied?" Andre-Louis was surprised by the question. "Oh, at the Louis Le Grand school."

Mr. des Amis frowned. He looked up sharply, as if checking to see if Andre-Louis was making a joke.

"For Heaven's sake! I am not asking where you studied literature. I want to know which academy taught you fencing."

"Oh, fencing!" It had barely crossed Andre-Louis's mind that people seriously studied sword fighting. "I never studied it very much. I took some lessons in the country once."

The master raised his eyebrows. "Then why did you bother to climb two flights of stairs?" he cried. He sounded impatient.

"The notice does not ask for an expert. If I am not good enough yet, I know the basics and can easily improve. I learn most things quickly," Andre-Louis said, praising himself. "As for the rest, I have the other qualities you need. I am young, as you can see. I will let you judge if I am wrong in thinking my manners are good. I am a lawyer by profession. However, I realize the rule here is that the law gives way to the sword."

Mr. des Amis smiled with approval. The young man definitely had good manners and seemed quick-witted. He looked over Andre-Louis's physical build carefully. "What is your name?" he asked.

Andre-Louis paused for a moment. "Andre-Louis," he said.

The dark, sharp eyes looked at him more closely.

"Well? Andre-Louis what?"

"Just Andre-Louis. Louis is my last name."

"Oh! That is an unusual last name. Your accent says you are from Brittany. Why did you leave?"

"To save my skin," he answered without thinking. Then he hurried to cover up his mistake. "I have an enemy," he explained.

Mr. des Amis frowned and rubbed his square chin. "You ran away?"

"You could say that."

"So you are a coward, eh?"

"I do not think so." And then Andre-Louis told a romantic lie. Surely a man who made his living with a sword would have a soft spot for romance. "You see, my enemy is a very strong sword fighter. He is the best blade in the province, maybe the best in France. That is his reputation. I decided to come to Paris to learn the art of fencing, and then go back and kill him. To be honest, that is why your notice caught my eye. You see, I do not have the money to pay for lessons. I hoped to find law work here. But I failed. There are already too many lawyers in Paris. While waiting, I spent the little money I had. So, in short, your notice seemed like a sign from a special providence."

Mr. des Amis grabbed him by the shoulders and looked right into his face.

"Is this true, my friend?" he asked.

"Not a single word of it," Andre-Louis said. He ruined his chances because he felt an overwhelming urge to say something unexpected. But he actually did not ruin them. Mr. des Amis burst out laughing. After laughing his fill, he admitted he was charmed by the applicant's basic honesty.

"Take off your coat," he said. "Let us see what you can do. Nature at least built you to be a sword fighter. You are light, active, and flexible. You have good arm length, and you seem smart. I might be able to make something out of you. I can teach you enough for my needs. I want you to teach the basics to new students before I take over to finish their training. Let us try. Take that mask and practice sword, and come over here."

He led Andre-Louis to the end of the room. The bare floor there had chalk lines drawn on it to show beginners where to put their feet.

After a ten-minute practice fight, Mr. des Amis offered him the job and explained what it involved. Along with teaching beginners the basics, he had to sweep the fencing room every morning. He had to keep the swords polished. He needed to help the gentlemen who came for lessons get dressed and undressed. He was expected to make himself generally useful. His pay for now would be forty silver coins a month. He could sleep in a small space behind the fencing room if he had nowhere else to live.

As you can see, the job was a bit humiliating. But if Andre-Louis wanted to eat dinner, he had to swallow his pride first.

"And so," he said, holding back a grimace, "the law gives way not only to the sword, but to the broom as well. So be it. I will stay."

It was typical of him that, once he made a choice, he threw himself into the work with great energy. He always did whatever he did using all his mental resources and physical strength. When he was not teaching young men the basics of fencing, he was practicing hard himself. He taught them the complicated, detailed salute, which he had mastered perfectly after a few days of intense practice. He also taught the eight defensive positions. In his free time, he exercised his eyes, wrists, and knees working on those same positions.

Mr. des Amis noticed his enthusiasm. He saw the clear chance to turn him into a truly useful assistant. Soon, he started taking Andre-Louis's training more seriously.

"Your hard work and passion deserve more than forty silver coins a month, my friend," the master told him after a week. "For now, however, I will make up the difference by teaching you the secrets of this noble art. Your future depends on how well you use this rare good luck of getting instruction from me."

After that, the master practiced with his new assistant for half an hour every morning before the academy opened. Under this truly excellent teaching, Andre-Louis improved at a speed that surprised and flattered Mr. des Amis. He would have been less flattered and more surprised if he knew a secret. At least half the reason for Andre-Louis's amazing progress was that he was eagerly reading all the books in the master's library. This library held about a dozen books on fencing theory written by great masters like La Bessiere, Danet, and Augustin Rousseau, the head of the King's Academy. Mr. des Amis based his own sword fighting entirely on practice, not theory. He was not a thinker or a student at all. To him, that small library was just a fitting decoration for a fencing school. It was proper furniture. The books themselves meant nothing else to him. He did not have the kind of mind that could read them and learn from them. He could not understand why anyone else would do so either. Andre-Louis, however, had a habit of studying. He knew how to learn from books. He read those works with huge benefit. He remembered their rules, carefully compared what one master said against another, and chose the best methods to practice.

After a month, Mr. des Amis suddenly realized his assistant had grown into a very strong fencer. If the master wanted to avoid losing in a practice fight, he really had to try hard.

"I said from the beginning that nature designed you for a sword fighter," he told Andre-Louis one day. "See how right I was. And see how well I knew how to shape the natural talent you were born with."

"All glory belongs to the master," Andre-Louis said.

Meanwhile, they had become great friends. Andre-Louis was now starting to teach students who were beyond the beginner stage. He was becoming an assistant in a much truer sense. Mr. des Amis was a noble, generous man. He did not try to take advantage of the young man's money problems. Instead, he rewarded his hard work by raising his pay to four gold coins a month.

Because he studied the theories of others so deeply and carefully, Andre-Louis naturally started to develop his own theories. One June morning, he lay on his small, cheap bed in the space behind the academy. He was thinking about a section on double and triple fake attacks that he had read in Danet's book the night before. When he read it, he felt Danet had stopped just short of a huge discovery in the art of fencing. Because Andre-Louis was a true thinker, he saw the theory that Danet had hinted at without realizing it himself. Andre-Louis lay on his back, staring at the cracks in the ceiling. He thought about this idea more deeply with the clear mind that early morning often brings to a sharp intellect. You must remember that for nearly two months, the sword had been his daily exercise and his almost constant thought. Focusing so intensely on the subject gave him incredible insight. Sword fighting, as he learned it, taught it, and saw it practiced every day, was made of a series of attacks and blocks. It involved moving the blade from one line of attack to another. But it was always a limited series. A fight usually only went as far as a half-dozen moves on either side. Then the fighters started over. But even so, these moves were random. What if every move from the very start was calculated?

That was part of his idea. It was one of the two pillars his theory rested on. The other was this. What would happen if someone expanded Danet's ideas about triple fakes? What if a fighter turned them into a series of real, planned moves designed to end on the fourth, fifth, or even sixth action? That means making a series of attacks to draw counter-attacks, which would then be blocked again. None of these attacks were meant to hit the target. They were simply meant to play the opponent's blade into a position that would eventually leave him wide open. Then, exactly as planned, the fighter would deliver an unstoppable strike. The fighter would have to predict every counter-attack from the opponent as the opponent's guard slowly widened. This widening would happen so gradually that the opponent would not even notice it. The opponent would be completely focused on trying to land his own strike during one of those counter-attacks.

In the past, Andre-Louis had been a fairly strong chess player. He excelled at chess because he could think ahead. Applying that skill to fencing should practically revolutionize the art. Of course, it was already applied in a basic, limited way through simple single, double, or triple fakes. But even the triple fake would look like a clumsy trick compared to the method he was inventing.

He thought about it more, and he became convinced he held the key to a great discovery. He was eager to test his theory.

That morning, he had a lesson with a strong student. Normally, Andre-Louis had to work hard to defend himself against this man. As they took their starting positions, Andre-Louis decided to hit him on the fourth move. He planned out the four actions that would lead up to the hit. They engaged swords in the third position. Andre-Louis started the attack by tapping the blade and straightening his arm. The opponent made the half-counter Andre-Louis expected. Andre-Louis quickly blocked it with a thrust in the fifth position. When the opponent blocked that, Andre-Louis attacked even lower. The opponent blocked correctly again, just as Andre-Louis had calculated. Then, Andre-Louis lunged, swirling his sword point into the fourth position, and landed a direct hit on his opponent's chest. The ease of it surprised him.

They began again. This time, he decided to strike on the fifth move. He landed the hit on that move just as easily. Then, to make things more complicated, he decided to try the sixth move. He planned out the combination of the five earlier moves in his head. Once again, he succeeded as easily as before.

The young gentleman fighting him laughed, but his voice sounded slightly embarrassed.

"I am falling apart this morning," the student said.

"You are not fighting at your normal strength," Andre-Louis agreed politely. Then, taking a big risk to push his theory to the absolute limit, he added, "So much so that I could almost guarantee hitting you exactly how and when I choose."

The skilled student looked at him with a bit of a sneer. "Ah, no. Not that," he said.

"Let us try. I will hit you on the fourth move. Come on! On guard!"

And it happened exactly as he promised.

Before this, the young gentleman had not thought highly of Andre-Louis's fencing skills. He just saw him as good enough for practice when the master was busy. Now, his eyes opened wide. In a sudden rush of generosity and excitement, Andre-Louis almost revealed his method. A little later, this method would become standard knowledge in fencing schools. But he stopped himself in time. Giving away his secret would destroy the respect he would earn from using it.

At noon, the academy was empty. Mr. des Amis called Andre-Louis for one of the lessons he still took occasionally. During their first practice round, Mr. des Amis took a full hit from Andre-Louis for the first time ever. The generous master laughed, looking very pleased.

"Aha! You are improving very fast, my friend," he said. He laughed again when he got hit in the second round, though he looked a little less pleased. After that, he settled down to fight seriously. As a result, he hit Andre-Louis three times in a row. When the fencing master tried his hardest, his speed and accuracy disrupted Andre-Louis's theory. The theory still required too much thought because he had not practiced it enough.

However, Andre-Louis considered his theory completely proven, and he was satisfied with that for the moment. All he had to do now was perfect it through practice. He threw himself into this task with the passionate excitement of an inventor. He focused on just a half-dozen combinations and practiced them constantly until they became almost automatic. He proved they never failed by testing them on Mr. des Amis's best students.

Finally, about a week after that last fight with Mr. des Amis, the master called him to practice again.

Mr. des Amis got hit again in the first round. He decided to use all his skill against his assistant. But today, his skill was useless against Andre-Louis's fierce attacks.

After taking a third hit, Mr. des Amis stepped back and pulled off his mask.

"What is this?" he asked. He looked pale, and his dark eyebrows were pulled together in a frown. His pride had not been hurt this badly in years. "Has someone taught you a secret attack?"

He had always bragged that he knew too much about swords to believe any nonsense about secret attacks. But Andre-Louis's performance had shaken those beliefs.

"No," Andre-Louis said. "I have been working hard. And it just so happens that I fence with my brain."

"I can see that. Well, well, I think I have taught you enough, my friend. I do not want an assistant who is better than I am."

"There is little danger of that," Andre-Louis said, smiling warmly. "You have been fencing hard all morning, and you are tired. Meanwhile, I have done very little and am completely fresh. That is the only reason for my temporary success."

His social grace and Mr. des Amis's basic good nature stopped the argument from going any further. It was almost threatening to turn bad. After that, whenever they fenced together, Andre-Louis made sure the master always scored at least two hits for every one of his own. He continued to perfect his theory into an almost unbeatable system every day. But he was willing to hide his skill for the sake of caution. He wanted Mr. des Amis to know he was strong, but he did not want to show his full strength and make the master unnecessarily jealous.

He managed this very well. While he became an even better assistant to the master, because his overall style and fencing had also improved a lot, he also made the master proud. Mr. des Amis saw him as the most brilliant student who had ever come through his academy. Andre-Louis never ruined the illusion by admitting the truth. His skill came much more from Mr. des Amis's library and his own natural intelligence than from any lessons he had taken.
