[Book 3 - Chapter 7: The Spadassinicides]

After an absence of a little more than a week, the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr was back in his place on the Right Side of the National Assembly. Properly speaking, we should refer to him as the former Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr. The time was September of 1790. This was two months after the downright Breton leveller Le Chapelier had proposed a new decree. The decree stated that nobility should no more be hereditary than infamy. It argued that just as the brand of the gallows must not defile the worthy descendants of a convicted criminal, the blazon of achievement should not glorify the unworthy descendants of a good man. So the decree had passed. It abolished hereditary nobility and threw family escutcheons onto the rubbish heap of things that an enlightened generation of philosophers would no longer tolerate. The Count de Lafayette had supported the motion and left the Assembly as plain Mr. Motier. The great tribune Count Mirabeau became plain Mr. Riquetti. The Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr became just simple Mr. Lesarques. They had done this during one of those moments of high excitement caused by the approach of the great National Festival of the Champ de Mars. No doubt many who had supported it thoroughly repented their decision the very next day. So, although it was now a law, no one bothered to enforce it just yet.

That is beside the point. As I said, the time was September. The day was dull and showery. Some of the damp and gloom seemed to have penetrated the long Hall of the Manege. Here, eight or nine hundred representatives of the three orders that composed the nation sat on eight rows of green benches. The benches were arranged in ascending elliptical tiers around the space known as La Piste.

The constitution-builders were debating whether the deliberating body to succeed the Constituent Assembly should work in conjunction with the King. They also debated whether it should be periodic or permanent, and whether it should govern by two chambers or by one.

The Abbe Maury was the son of a cobbler. In these days of extreme contrasts, he was the chief orator of the party of the Right. These men were known as the Blacks, and they fought the losing battles of Privilege. The Abbe Maury was in the tribune. He appeared to be urging the adoption of a two-chamber system framed on the English model. He was even more long-winded and boring than usual. His arguments sounded more and more like a sermon. The tribune of the National Assembly became more and more like a pulpit. Conversely, the members looked less and less like a congregation. They grew restless under his steady flow of pompous words. Four ushers with carefully powdered heads wore black satin breeches, chains of office on their breasts, and gilded swords at their sides. They circulated in the Piste, clapped their hands, and hissed in vain.

They cried, "Silence! Take your seats!"

The president at his green-covered table facing the tribune intermittently rang his bell. This was equally useless. The Abbe Maury had talked too long and had failed to interest the members for some time. He finally realized this and stopped speaking. The hum of conversation became general. Then it fell abruptly. There was a silence of expectancy as heads turned and necks craned. Even the group of secretaries at the round table below the president's dais roused themselves from their usual apathy. They wanted to consider this young man who was mounting the tribune of the Assembly for the first time.

The announcer called out, "Mr. Andre-Louis Moreau, substitute deputy, replacing the deceased Emmanuel Lagron for Ancenis in the Department of the Loire."

The Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr shook himself out of his gloomy abstraction. He felt a grim interest in the successor of the deputy he had slain. You can imagine how his interest heightened when he heard the name. He looked across the room and recognized this Andre-Louis Moreau. This was the young scoundrel who was continually crossing his path. He was continually exerting a deep, sinister influence against the Marquis. This young man made the Marquis regret sparing his life that day at Gavrillac two years ago. The fact that he had stepped into the shoes of Lagron seemed too fitting to be a mere coincidence. It felt like a direct challenge in itself.

He looked at the young man in wonder rather than in anger. As he looked, he was filled by a vague and premonitory uneasiness.

The young man's presence was a challenge in itself, and he demonstrated this in clear terms right from the start.

Andre-Louis began, "I come before you as a substitute deputy to fill the place of a man who was murdered some three weeks ago."

It was a challenging opening. It instantly provoked an indignant outcry from the Blacks. Andre-Louis paused and looked at them. He smiled a little as a singularly self-confident young man.

He continued, "Mr. President, the gentlemen of the Right do not appear to like my words. That is not surprising. The gentlemen of the Right notoriously do not like the truth."

This time there was an uproar. The members of the Left roared with laughter. The members of the Right thundered menacingly. The ushers circulated faster than usual. They grew agitated, clapped their hands, and called in vain for silence.

The President rang his bell.

The voice of La Tour d'Azyr rose above the general din. He had half-risen from his seat and shouted, "Mountebank! This is not the theatre!"

Andre-Louis answered, "No, sir. It is becoming a hunting ground for bully swordsmen." The uproar grew.

The substitute deputy looked around and waited. He saw the encouraging grin of Le Chapelier nearby. He also saw the quiet and approving smile of Kersain, another Breton deputy of his acquaintance. A little farther off, he saw the great head of Mirabeau thrown back. Mirabeau's great eyes looked at him from under a frown in a sort of wonder. Yonder, among the moving sea of faces, he spotted the sallow face of the lawyer from Arras. This was Robespierre, or de Robespierre as the little snob now called himself. He had assumed the aristocratic particle as the prerogative of a man of his distinction in the councils of his country. The deputy for Arras had his tip-tilted nose in the air and his carefully curled head on one side. He was observing Andre-Louis attentively. He had thrust the horn-rimmed spectacles he used for reading up onto his pale forehead. He considered the speaker through a leveled spy-glass. His thin-lipped mouth stretched a little in that tiger-cat smile that would later become so famous and feared.

Gradually the uproar wore itself out. It diminished enough so that the President could make himself heard. He leaned forward and gravely addressed the young man in the tribune.

The President said, "Sir, if you wish to be heard, let me beg of you not to be provocative in your language." He then turned to the others and added, "Gentlemen, if we are to proceed, I beg that you will restrain your feelings until the substitute deputy has concluded his discourse."

Andre-Louis replied, "I shall endeavor to obey, Mr. President. I will leave provocation to the gentlemen of the Right. If the few words I have used so far have been provocative, I regret it. But it was necessary for me to refer to the distinguished deputy whose place I come so unworthily to fill. It was also unavoidable that I refer to the event that has procured us this sad necessity. The deputy Lagron was a man of singular nobility of mind. He was a selfless, dutiful, and zealous man. He was inflamed by the high purpose of doing his duty by his electors and by this Assembly. He possessed what his opponents would call a dangerous gift of eloquence."

La Tour d'Azyr writhed at the well-known phrase. It was his own phrase. He had used it to explain his action in the matter of Philippe de Vilmorin. This was the phrase that people had cast in his teeth from time to time with vindictive menace.

Then the crisp voice of the witty Canales cut sharply into the speaker's momentary pause. Canales was the rapier of the Privileged party.

He asked with great solemnity, "Mr. President, has the substitute deputy mounted the tribune to take part in the debate on the constitution of the legislative assemblies, or to pronounce a funeral oration upon the departed deputy Lagron?"

This time the Blacks gave way to mirth, until the substitute deputy checked them.

He declared, "That laughter is obscene!" He flung his glove into the face of Privilege in a truly Gallic fashion. He was determined to take no half measures. The rippling laughter perished instantly and was quenched in speechless fury.

He proceeded solemnly.

He continued, "You all know how Lagron died. To refer to his death at all requires courage. To laugh while referring to it requires something that I will not attempt to qualify. If I have alluded to his decease, it is because my appearance among you seemed to render some such allusion necessary. It is my duty to take up the burden that he set down. I do not pretend that I have the strength, the courage, or the wisdom of Lagron. But I will bear that burden with every ounce of strength, courage, and wisdom that I possess. I trust that the means taken to impose silence upon that eloquent voice will not be taken to impose silence upon mine, for the sake of those who might attempt it."

There was a faint murmur of applause from the Left. There was a splutter of contemptuous laughter from the Right.

A voice called out to him, "Rhodomont!"

He looked in the direction of the voice. It came from the group of hired swordsmen among the Blacks across the Piste. He smiled. His lips answered inaudibly.

He mouthed, "No, my friend. I am Scaramouche. I am the subtle, dangerous fellow who goes tortuously to his ends." He resumed aloud, "Mr. President, some people will not understand that our purpose here is to make laws by which France may be equitably governed. These laws must lift France out of the morass of bankruptcy into which she is in danger of sinking. But it seems some people want blood instead of laws. I solemnly warn them that this blood will end by choking them if they do not learn in time to discard force and allow reason to prevail."

Once again, there was something in that phrase that stirred a memory in La Tour d'Azyr. He turned in the fresh uproar to speak to his cousin Chabrillane, who sat beside him.

He said, "This bastard of Gavrillac is a daring rogue."

Chabrillane looked at him with gleaming eyes. His face was white with anger.

He replied, "Let him talk himself out. I do not think he will be heard again after today. Leave this to me."

La Tour could hardly tell you why, but he sank back in his seat with a sense of relief. He had been telling himself that this matter demanded action. It was a challenge he had to take up. Despite his rage, he felt a singular unwillingness to act. This fellow had a trick of reminding him too unpleasantly of that young abbe done to death in the garden behind the Breton inn at Gavrillac. The death of Philippe de Vilmorin did not lie heavily on the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr's conscience. He believed his action was fully justified. But his memory revived an unpleasant picture. He remembered that distraught boy kneeling over the bleeding body of the friend he had loved. The boy had almost begged to be slain with him, calling the Marquis a murderer and a coward to incite him.

Meanwhile, the substitute deputy left the subject of the death of Lagron. He brought himself into order and began speaking upon the question under debate. He contributed nothing of value to it. He urged nothing definite. His speech on the subject was very brief. This debate was merely the pretext, not the purpose, for ascending the tribune.

Later, he left the hall at the end of the sitting with Le Chapelier at his side. He found himself densely surrounded by deputies who acted as a bodyguard. Most of them were Bretons. They aimed to screen him from the provocations his own words in the Assembly would surely bring down upon his head. For a moment, the massive form of Mirabeau appeared alongside him.

The great man said, "Congratulations, Mr. Moreau. You acquitted yourself very well. They will want your blood, no doubt. But be discreet, sir, if I may presume to advise you. Do not allow yourself to be misled by any false sense of quixotry. Ignore their challenges. I do so myself. I place each challenger upon my list. There are some fifty there already, and there they will remain. Refuse them what they call satisfaction, and all will be well."

Andre-Louis smiled and sighed.

The hypocrite said, "It requires courage."

Mirabeau replied, "Of course it does. But you seem to have plenty."

Andre-Louis responded, "Hardly enough, perhaps. But I shall do my best."

They had come through the vestibule. It was lined with eager Blacks waiting for the young man who had insulted them so flagrantly from the rostrum. However, Andre-Louis's bodyguard had prevented any of them from reaching him.

They emerged into the open under the great awning at the head of the Carriere. This awning was erected to let carriages reach the door under cover. The people in front of him dispersed a little. As he reached the edge of the awning, his front was entirely uncovered for a moment. Outside, the rain was falling heavily and churning the ground into thick mud. Andre-Louis hesitated to step out into the deluge for a moment, with Le Chapelier ever at his side.

The watchful Chabrillane had seen his chance. He made a detour momentarily out into the rain and came face to face with the daring young Breton. He rudely and violently thrust Andre-Louis back, as if to make room for himself under the shelter.

Andre-Louis was not under any delusion about the man's deliberate purpose for a second. Neither were the people standing near him. They made a belated and ineffectual attempt to close around him. Andre-Louis was grievously disappointed. It was not Chabrillane he had been expecting. His disappointment showed on his face. The arrogant Chevalier mistook it for something very different.

But if Chabrillane was the man appointed to deal with him, Andre-Louis would make the best of it.

He said very civilly, "I think you are pushing against me, sir." He used his elbow and shoulder to thrust Mr. de Chabrillane back into the rain.

The Chevalier bullied, "I desire to take shelter, sir."

Andre-Louis replied, "You may do so without standing on my feet. I have a prejudice against anyone standing on my feet. My feet are very tender. Perhaps you did not know it, sir. Please say no more."

The Chevalier exclaimed, slightly flustered, "Why, I wasn't speaking, you lout!"

Andre-Louis responded, "Were you not? I thought perhaps you were about to apologize."

Chabrillane laughed and said, "Apologize? To you! Do you know that you are amusing?" He stepped under the awning for the second time and thrust Andre-Louis rudely back in view of everyone.

Andre-Louis cried out with a grimace, "Ah! You hurt me, sir. I have told you not to push against me." He raised his voice so everyone might hear him. He pushed Mr. de Chabrillane back into the rain once more.

Despite his slenderness, Andre-Louis's assiduous daily sword practice had given him an arm of iron. He also threw his weight into the thrust. His assailant reeled backwards a few steps. His heel struck a large piece of timber left on the ground by some workmen that morning. He sat down suddenly in the mud.

A roar of laughter rose from all who witnessed the fine gentleman's downfall. He rose in a fury, covered in mud. In that fury, he sprang at Andre-Louis.

Andre-Louis had made him ridiculous. This was completely unforgivable.

He sputtered, "You shall meet me for this! I shall kill you for it."

His inflamed face was within a foot of Andre-Louis's face. Andre-Louis laughed. In the silence, everybody heard the laugh and the words that followed.

Andre-Louis said, "Oh, is that what you wanted? But why didn't you say so before? You would have spared me the trouble of knocking you down. I thought gentlemen of your profession invariably conducted these affairs with decency, decorum, and a certain grace. Had you done so, you might have saved your breeches."

Chabrillane snapped, livid with very real fury, "How soon shall we settle this?"

Andre-Louis was suavity itself. He replied, "Whenever you please, sir. It is for you to say when it will suit your convenience to kill me. I think that was the intention you announced, was it not?"

Chabrillane said, "Tomorrow morning in the Bois. Perhaps you will bring a friend."

Andre-Louis responded, "Certainly, sir. Tomorrow morning, then. I hope we shall have fine weather. I detest the rain."

Chabrillane looked at him almost with amazement. Andre-Louis smiled pleasantly.

He said, "Don't let me detain you now, sir. We quite understand each other. I shall be in the Bois at nine o'clock tomorrow morning."

Chabrillane replied, "That is too late for me, sir."

Andre-Louis said, "Any other hour would be too early for me. I do not like to have my habits disturbed. Nine o'clock or not at all, as you please."

Chabrillane argued, "But I must be at the Assembly at nine for the morning session."

Andre-Louis responded, "I am afraid you will have to kill me first, sir. I have a prejudice against being killed before nine o'clock."

This was too complete a subversion of the usual procedure for Mr. de Chabrillane's stomach. Here was a rustic deputy assuming the precise tone of sinister mockery that his class usually dealt out to victims from the Third Estate. To heighten the irritation, Andre-Louis acted like Scaramouche always did. He produced his snuffbox and proffered it with a steady hand to Le Chapelier before helping himself.

It seemed Chabrillane was not even allowed to make a good exit after all he had suffered.

He said, "Very well, sir. Nine o'clock, then. We will see if you talk as pertly afterwards."

On that note, he flung himself away before the jeers of the provincial deputies. It did not soothe his rage to be laughed at by urchins all the way down the Rue Dauphine. They laughed because of the mud and filth that dripped from his satin breeches and the tails of his elegant, striped coat.

The members of the Third Estate jeered on the surface. Underneath, however, they trembled with fear and indignation. It was too much. Lagron had been killed by one of these bullies. Now his successor was challenged and about to be killed by another of them on the very first day of his appearance. Several deputies came to implore Andre-Louis not to go to the Bois. They asked him to ignore the challenge and the whole affair. They believed it was a deliberate attempt to put him out of the way. He listened seriously, shook his head gloomily, and finally promised to think it over.

He was in his seat again for the afternoon session as if nothing disturbed him.

When the Assembly met the next morning, his place was vacant. Mr. de Chabrillane's place was also vacant. Gloom and resentment sat upon the members of the Third Estate. It brought a more acrid note than usual into their debates. They disapproved of the rashness of their new recruit. Some openly condemned his lack of caution. Very few expected to see him again, and those were only the little group in Le Chapelier's confidence.

Therefore, it was with as much amazement as relief that they saw him enter a few minutes after ten. He was calm, composed, and bland as he threaded his way to his seat. The speaker occupying the rostrum at that moment was a member of the Privileged party. He stopped short and stared in incredulous dismay. Here was something he could not understand at all. Then, from somewhere, a voice explained the phenomenon contemptuously to satisfy the amazement on both sides of the assembly.

The voice said, "They haven't met. He shirked it at the last moment."

Everyone thought it must be so. The mystification ceased, and men were settling back into their seats. Andre-Louis reached his place and heard the voice that explained the matter to universal satisfaction. He paused before taking his seat. He felt it incumbent upon him to reveal the true fact.

Andre-Louis declared, "Mr. President, please accept my excuses for my late arrival." There was no necessity for this. It was a mere piece of theatricality, but Scaramouche could not forgo it. He continued, "I have been detained by an engagement of a pressing nature. I also bring you the excuses of Mr. de Chabrillane. Unfortunately, he will be permanently absent from this Assembly in the future."

The silence was complete. Andre-Louis sat down.
