[Book 3 - Chapter 13: Sanctuary]

Chapter 13. Sanctuary

Madame de Plougastel and Aline sat waiting in that handsome house on the Rue du Paradis, deep into the late afternoon of that endless day of horror. They were surrounded by perpetual alarms, the crack of musketry, rolling drums, and the distant muttering of angry mobs. They were no longer waiting for Rougane. They realized that this friendly messenger would not return, whatever the reason might be, and by now there were no doubt many reasons. They waited without knowing what they were waiting for. They simply waited for whatever might happen next.

Earlier in the afternoon, the roar of battle had approached them. It raced swiftly in their direction, swelling in volume and horror with every passing moment. It was the frenzied clamor of a mob drunk on blood and bent on destruction. Nearby, that fierce wave of humanity paused in its violent progress. Then came the blows of pikes against a door, along with demanding calls to open it. After that came the tearing of wood, the shattering of glass, and screams of terror blending with screams of rage. Running beneath these shrill sounds was the deep, rumbling sound of bestial laughter.

The mob was hunting two wretched Swiss guardsmen who were blindly seeking escape. They tracked the guards to a nearby house and cruelly beat them to death. Once their work was done, the hunters, both men and women, formed a makeshift battalion. They came swinging down the Rue du Paradis, chanting the song of Marseilles. It was a new song to Paris in those days:

    Allons, enfants de la patrie!
    Le jour de gloire est arrive
    Contre nous de la tyrannie
    L’etendard sanglant est leve.

The dread sound came nearer, raucously bawled by hundreds of voices. This harsh anthem had suddenly replaced the merry, trivial air of the "Ca ira," which had been the playful tune of the revolution until now. Madame de Plougastel and Aline clung to each other instinctively. They had heard the destruction of the other house in their neighborhood without knowing the reason for it. What if it was now the turn of the Hotel Plougastel? There was no real cause to fear an attack, but amid such confusing and terrifying turmoil, they could only expect the worst.

The dreadful song and the thunder of heavy boots on the roughly paved street passed by and finally faded away. They breathed again, feeling almost as if a miracle had saved them. But a fresh alarm gripped them an instant later. Madame’s young footman, Jacques, the most trusted of her servants, burst into the room unceremoniously with a scared face. He announced that a man had just climbed over the garden wall. The intruder claimed to be a friend of madame's and demanded to see her immediately.

"But he looks like a revolutionary, madame," the staunch fellow warned her.

Her thoughts and hopes leaped at once to Rougane.

"Bring him in," she commanded breathlessly.

Jacques went out and returned a moment later with a tall man. The stranger wore a long, shabby, and oversized overcoat, along with a wide-brimmed hat turned down all around and adorned with an enormous tricolor cockade. He removed the hat as he entered.

Jacques stood behind him and noticed that the man's hair, though now messy, showed signs of having been carefully styled. It was tied back and carried lingering traces of powder. The young footman wondered what could be on the man's face, which was turned away from him, to make his mistress cry out and recoil in shock. Then, she abruptly dismissed Jacques with a wave of her hand.

The newcomer advanced to the middle of the salon, breathing hard and moving like an exhausted man. He leaned against a table and faced Madame de Plougastel. She stood looking at him with a strange horror in her eyes.

In the background, Aline sat on a bench at the far end of the salon. She stared in bewilderment and fear at the man's face. It was smeared with a mask of blood and dust, making it almost unrecognizable, yet it felt strangely familiar. Then the man spoke, and she instantly recognized the voice. It was the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr.

"My dear friend," he said, "please forgive me if I startled you. Forgive me for forcing my way in here without permission at such a time and in such a manner. But you can see how things are for me. I am a fugitive. During my frantic flight, I did not know which way to turn for safety, so I thought of you. I told myself that if I could just reach your house safely, I might find sanctuary."

"You are in danger?" she asked.

"In danger?" He almost seemed to laugh silently at the unnecessary question. "If I were to show myself openly in the streets right now, I might be lucky to live for five minutes! My friend, it has been a massacre. A few of us escaped from the Tuileries Palace at the very end, only to be hunted to death in the streets. I doubt a single Swiss guard is still alive by now. They got the worst of it, poor devils. And as for us, good God! The mob hates us even more than they hate the Swiss. That is the reason for this filthy disguise."

He peeled off the shaggy greatcoat and threw it aside. He stepped forward wearing the black satin that had been the uniform of the hundred knights of the dagger, the loyal noblemen who had rallied at the Tuileries that morning to defend their king.

His coat was torn across the back, and his neckcloth and the ruffles at his wrists were ripped and stained with blood. With his smeared face and messy hair, he was a terrible sight to behold. Yet he still managed to carry himself with his usual easy confidence, even remembering to kiss the trembling hand that Madame de Plougastel extended to welcome him.

"You did well to come to me, Gervais," she said. "Yes, you have sanctuary here for now. You will be quite safe, at least for as long as we are safe ourselves. My servants are completely trustworthy. Sit down and tell me everything."

He obeyed her and practically collapsed into the armchair she pushed forward. He was completely exhausted from physical effort, nervous strain, or perhaps both. He pulled a handkerchief from his pocket and wiped some of the blood and dirt from his face.

"It is a short story," he said, his tone heavy with the bitterness of despair. "This is the end for us, my dear. Plougastel is lucky to be across the border at a time like this. I should be there myself, if I had not been foolish enough to trust people who proved completely unworthy of it today. My decision to remain in Paris is the crowning foolishness of a life full of mistakes. Coming to you in my hour of most urgent need only proves the point." He laughed bitterly.

Madame moistened her dry lips. "And what now?" she asked him.

"We just need to get away as soon as possible, if it can still be done. There is no longer any room for us here in France, at least not above ground. Today has proven that much." Then he looked up at her standing beside him, looking pale and timid, and he smiled. He patted her delicate hand as it rested on the arm of his chair. "My dear Therese, unless your charity extends to giving me a drink, you will see me die of thirst right before your eyes. And that will happen long before the peasant mob gets a chance to finish me off."

She jumped slightly. "I should have thought of that!" she cried in self-reproach, turning quickly. "Aline," she begged, "tell Jacques to bring us..."

"Aline!" he echoed, interrupting her and swinging around in his chair. As Aline stood up and stepped out of the shadows, he finally saw her. He pushed himself abruptly onto his weary legs and stood stiffly, bowing to her across the gleaming floor. "Mademoiselle, I did not realize you were here," he said. He seemed unusually uncomfortable and startled, like a man caught doing something forbidden.

"I noticed that, monsieur," she answered, stepping forward to carry out Madame de Plougastel's request. She paused in front of him. "From the bottom of my heart, monsieur, I am deeply sorry that we must meet again under such painful circumstances."

They had not stood face to face since the day of his duel with André-Louis. That was the day his final hope of winning her heart had died and been buried forever.

He stopped himself just as he was about to answer her. His glance drifted over to Madame de Plougastel. Looking oddly hesitant for a man who was usually so smooth with his words, he simply bowed in silence.

"Please, sit down, monsieur, I beg of you. You are exhausted."

"You are very kind to notice. With your permission, then, I will." He sat back down in his chair. She continued on her way to the door and left the room to fetch the drinks.

When Aline returned a moment later, the two of them had inexplicably changed places. Madame de Plougastel was now sitting in the gilded brocade armchair. The Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr, despite his exhaustion, was leaning over the back of it and talking earnestly. His posture made it look as though he were pleading with her. He broke off instantly the moment Aline entered and moved away, leaving her feeling like she had interrupted something private. She also noticed that the Countess was crying.

The diligent Jacques followed close behind Aline, carrying a tray loaded with food and wine. Madame poured a glass for her guest, and he drank a deep gulp of the Burgundy wine. Then, holding out his grimy hands, he asked for permission to clean himself up before sitting down to eat.

Jacques led him away to wash. When the Marquis returned, he had wiped away the last traces of the rough handling he had endured. He looked almost like his normal self again. His torn clothes were adjusted, and his posture was calm, dignified, and polite. Yet his face was very pale and haggard. He seemed to have suddenly aged, looking every bit as old as his true years.

He ate and drank with a strong appetite, telling them he had not tasted food since early morning. As he ate, he recounted the terrible events of the day. He described the details of his escape from the Tuileries Palace when all was finally lost. He told them how the Swiss guards had fired their last bullets before being ruthlessly massacred by an incredibly furious mob.

"It was all handled very poorly," he concluded critically. "We were timid when we should have been firm, and we finally became firm when it was already too late. That has been the history of our side since the beginning of this cursed struggle. We have lacked proper leadership from the start, and now, as I have said, we are finished. All that is left is to escape, as soon as we can figure out how to manage it."

Madame told him about her hopes for Rougane helping them escape.

The news lifted him out of his gloom, and he felt slightly more optimistic.

"You are wrong to give up on that hope," he assured her. "If this mayor is as helpful as you say, he can certainly do what his son promised. But it would have been too late for him to reach you last night. And today, even if he made it to Paris, it would have been almost impossible for him to cross the chaotic streets from the other side of the city. It is very likely that he will still come. I pray that he does. Knowing that you and Mademoiselle de Kercadiou are safely out of this mess would comfort me more than anything else."

"We should take you with us," Madame de Plougastel said.

"Ah! But how?"

"Young Rougane was supposed to bring me travel permits for three people. The passes were for Aline, myself, and my footman, Jacques. You could take Jacques's place."

"My word, madame, there is no man whose place I would not gladly take to get out of Paris right now." And he laughed.

Their spirits lifted along with his, and their fading hopes were revived. But as dusk fell over the city without any sign of their rescuer, those hopes began to fade once again.

Finally, the Marquis pleaded weariness. He asked for permission to excuse himself so he could try to get some rest, preparing for whatever they might have to face next. After he left, Madame de Plougastel persuaded Aline to go and lie down as well.

"I will wake you the moment he arrives, my dear," she said. She bravely kept up a pretense of confidence that had completely vanished by now.

Aline kissed her affectionately and left the room. She seemed so calm and untroubled on the outside that the Countess wondered if the girl truly realized the danger they were in. Their peril was deeply increased by hiding a man as famous and hated as the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr, someone whose enemies were probably hunting for him at that very moment.

Left alone, Madame de Plougastel lay down on a couch in the salon so she could be ready for any emergency. It was a hot summer night, and the glass doors opening out into the lush garden were left wide open to let in the breeze. Carried on that breeze were the intermittent, distant sounds of the mob's continuing horrors. It was the terrifying aftermath of a bloody day.

Madame de Plougastel lay there for over an hour, listening to the noise. She thanked Heaven that the riots were at least far away for now. But she dreaded that the violence might move closer at any moment. She prayed that her own Bondy district would not become the scene of the same horrors echoing from the south and west parts of the city.

The Countess’s couch lay in the shadows, as all the lights in the long salon had been blown out. The only remaining light came from a cluster of candles in a heavy silver candelabra. It sat on a round wooden table in the middle of the room, creating an island of light in the surrounding gloom.

The clock above the fireplace chimed melodiously to mark ten o'clock. Suddenly, another sound broke the immediate silence and vibrated through the house. It brought Madame de Plougastel to her feet in a breathless mix of hope and dread. Someone was knocking sharply on the front door downstairs. Agonizing moments of suspense followed, ending when the footman Jacques burst into the room. He looked around wildly, not seeing his mistress at first.

"Madame! Madame!" he panted, completely out of breath.

"What is it, Jacques?" Her voice was perfectly steady, now that she was forced to be brave. She stepped out of the shadows and into the island of candlelight around the table.

"There is a man downstairs," Jacques stammered. "He is asking... he is demanding to see you right away."

"A man?" she questioned.

"He seems to be a government official. At least, he is wearing an official sash. He refuses to give a name. He says his name would mean nothing to you, but he insists that he must speak to you in person immediately."

"An official?" Madame de Plougastel repeated.

"An official," Jacques repeated. "I would not have let him inside, but he demanded it in the name of the Nation. Madame, you must tell us what to do. Robert is with me. If you want us to throw him out... whatever it may be..."

"No, no, my good Jacques." She was perfectly composed. "If this man intended to harm us, he surely would not have come alone. Bring him to me, and then ask Mademoiselle de Kercadiou to join us if she is awake."

Jacques left the room, feeling slightly reassured himself. Madame de Plougastel sat down in the armchair by the table, placing herself clearly in the light. She smoothed her dress with an automatic motion. Her hopes for Rougane may have been useless, but perhaps her sudden fears were useless too. Just as she had said, a man on anything but a peaceful errand would have brought a squad of men with him.

The door opened again, and Jacques reappeared. Stepping briskly past the footman came a slender man wearing a wide-brimmed hat adorned with a tricolor cockade. He wore an olive-green riding coat with a broad revolutionary sash tied around his waist, and a sword hung at his side.

He swept off his hat, letting the candlelight glint on its steel buckle. Madame de Plougastel found herself being silently watched by a pair of large, dark eyes set in a lean, brown face. The man's eyes were intensely focused and searching.

She leaned forward, and a look of complete disbelief swept across her face. Then her eyes lit up, and color finally crept back into her pale cheeks. She stood up suddenly, trembling all over.

"André-Louis!" she exclaimed.
