CHAPTER 14. THE BARRIER

His gift for laughter seemed completely gone. For once, there was no hint of humor in his dark eyes as he continued to study her with that strange, scrutinizing gaze. Yet, though his look was serious, his thoughts were not. His sharp mind saw through pretense, and he had an ability to observe dispassionately. This skill, if he'd used it differently, could have taken him far. He perceived the absurdity, the artificiality of the emotion he felt, but he refused to let it control him. It came entirely from the awareness that she was his mother. As if, after all, the more or less accidental fact that she'd given birth to him could create a real bond between them now! A mother who gives birth and then abandons her child is worse than an animal. He had thought about this. He'd had plenty of time to think about it during those long, turbulent hours he'd been forced to wait. It would have been almost impossible to get across that chaotic city, and certainly unwise to try.

He had concluded that by agreeing to rescue her at such a time, he was committing to a purely sentimental, chivalrous act. The Mayor of Meudon had demanded signed releases from him before issuing the necessary safe-conducts. This put his entire future, perhaps even his life, at risk. And he had agreed to do this not for something real, but for an idea. He, who all his life had avoided the empty appeal of shallow sentimentality.

André-Louis thought this as he considered her now so intently. Naturally, he found it incredibly interesting to consciously look at his mother for the first time at twenty-eight years old.

From her, he looked at last at Jacques, who remained standing at attention by the open door.

"Could we be alone, madame?" he asked her.

She waved the footman away, and the door closed. In agitated silence, without questioning, she waited for him to explain why he was there at such an unusual time.

He told her, "Rougane could not return. At Monsieur de Kercadiou’s request, I come instead."

"You! You are sent to rescue us!" Her amazement was stronger than her relief.

"That, and to make your acquaintance, madame."

"To make my acquaintance? But what do you mean, André-Louis?"

"This letter from Monsieur de Kercadiou will tell you." Intrigued by his strange words and even stranger manner, she took the folded sheet. Her hands shaking, she broke the seal and brought the letter closer to the light. Her eyes grew troubled as she read. Her hands shook more violently, and halfway through, a moan escaped her. She darted a glance, almost of terror, at the slim, straight man standing incredibly impassive at the edge of the light. Then she tried to read on. But Monsieur de Kercadiou's cramped handwriting blurred before her eyes. She could not read. Besides, what else he said didn't matter. She had read enough. The sheet fluttered from her hands to the table. Her face, pale as wax, now held an indescribable wistfulness and sadness as she looked at André-Louis.

"And so you know, my child?" Her voice was barely a whisper.

"I know, madame my mother."

She completely missed the grimness, the subtle mix of merciless derision and reproach in his tone. She cried out at the word. For her, in that moment, time and the world stood still. Her danger in Paris, as the wife of an intriguer in Coblenz, vanished. Every other thought was pushed aside. Her mind could only focus on the fact that her only son, the child conceived in adultery, born secretly and in shame in a remote Brittany village twenty-eight years ago, now acknowledged her. She couldn't even spare a thought for the betrayal of that sacred secret, or the consequences that might follow, in this supreme moment.

She took one or two faltering steps towards him, then hesitated. Then she opened her arms. Sobs choked her voice.

"Won’t you come to me, André-Louis?"

He hesitated for another moment, startled by her plea. He was almost angry at his heart's response, with reason and sentiment battling within him. This wasn't real, his reason argued. The intense emotion she showed, and that he felt, was absurd. Yet he went. Her arms wrapped around him. Her wet cheek pressed hard against his. Her body, still graceful despite the years, shook with the passionate storm inside her.

"Oh, André-Louis, my child, if you knew how I have longed to hold you like this! If you knew how by denying myself this, I have atoned and suffered! Kercadiou shouldn't have told you, not even now. It was wrong, perhaps terribly wrong, to you. It would have been better if he'd left me here to my fate, whatever it might be. And yet, whatever comes of this, to be able to hold you like this, to acknowledge you, to hear you call me mother—oh, André-Louis, I can't regret it now. I can't... I can't wish it were any other way."

"Is there any need, madame?" he asked, his stoicism deeply shaken. "There's no need to share this with anyone else. This is just for tonight. Tonight, we are mother and son. Tomorrow, we go back to our old roles, and, at least outwardly, we forget."

"Forget? Have you no heart, André-Louis?"

The question curiously reminded him of his attitude towards life—that theatrical stance he considered true philosophy. He also remembered what lay ahead. He realized he had to control not only himself but her. Giving in too much to sentiment at a time like this could ruin them all.

"It is a question asked of me so often that it must contain some truth," he said. "My upbringing is to blame for that."

She tightened her grip around his neck just as he tried to pull away from her embrace.

"You do not blame me for your upbringing? Knowing everything, André-Louis, you can't entirely blame me. You must be merciful to me. You must forgive me. You must! I had no choice."

"When we know everything about a situation, we can only forgive, madame. That is the deepest religious truth ever written. It contains, in fact, an entire religion—the noblest religion any person could have to guide them. I say this to comfort you, my mother."

She sprang away from him with a startled cry. Beyond him, in the shadows by the door, a pale figure shimmered like a ghost. It moved into the light, revealing itself as Aline. She had come in answer to the forgotten summons madame had sent her via Jacques.

Entering unnoticed, she had seen André-Louis embracing the woman he called "mother." She had recognized him instantly by his voice, and she couldn't say what bewildered her more: his presence there, or what she had overheard.

"You heard, Aline?" madame cried out.

"I couldn't help it, madame. You sent for me. I am sorry if..." She stopped, looking at André-Louis for a long moment, curiously. She was pale, but completely composed. She held out her hand to him. "So you've come at last, André," she said. "You could have come sooner."

"I come when I am wanted," he answered. "That's the only time one can be sure of being received." He said it without bitterness, then stooped to kiss her hand.

"I hope you can forgive me for what's past, since I failed in my purpose," he said gently, almost pleading. "I couldn't have come to you pretending that my failure was intentional, a compromise between what was necessary and your own wishes. Because it wasn't that. And yet, you don't seem to have benefited from my failure. You are still a maid."

She turned her shoulder to him.

"There are things," she said, "that you will never understand."

"Life, for one," he acknowledged. "I confess I'm finding it bewildering. The explanations meant to simplify it only seem to complicate it further." He looked at Madame de Plougastel.

"You mean something, I suppose," said mademoiselle.

"Aline!" The Countess spoke. She knew the danger of partial revelations. "I can trust you, child, I know, and André-Louis, I am sure, will offer no objection." She had picked up the letter to show it to Aline. But first, her eyes questioned him.

"Oh, none, madame," he assured her. "It's entirely a matter for yourself."

Aline looked from one to the other with troubled eyes, hesitating to take the letter that was now offered. When she had read it, she thoughtfully replaced it on the table. For a moment, she stood there with her head bowed, the other two watching her. Then, impulsively, she ran to madame and put her arms around her.

"Aline!" It was a cry of wonder, almost of joy. "You don't utterly abhor me!"

"My dear," said Aline, and kissed the tear-stained face that seemed to have grown years older in those last few hours.

In the background, André-Louis, steeling himself against emotionalism, spoke with the voice of Scaramouche.

"It would be wise, mesdames, to postpone all emotional outbursts until we can indulge them at greater leisure and in more security. It's growing late. If we're to get out of this mess, we should be wise to leave without more delay."

It was a tonic, as effective as it was necessary. It startled them into remembering their circumstances. Spurred by his words, they went at once to make their preparations.

They left him for perhaps a quarter of an hour. He paced that long room alone, saved from impatience only by the turmoil of his mind. When they finally returned, they were accompanied by a tall man. He wore a full-skirted, shaggy greatcoat and a broad hat with its brim turned down all around. He remained respectfully by the door in the shadows.

The two women had planned it this way between them. Or rather, the Countess had planned it after Aline warned her. Aline had said that André-Louis' bitter hostility towards the Marquis made it unthinkable that he would consciously lift a finger to save him.

Despite the close friendship between Monsieur de Kercadiou, his niece, and Madame de Plougastel, there were several matters concerning them that the Countess didn't know about. One of these was the past plan for a marriage between Aline and Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr. Aline, naturally enough given her feelings, had never mentioned it. Monsieur de Kercadiou had also never alluded to it since coming to Meudon, by which time he had realized how unlikely it was ever to happen.

Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr's concern for Aline on the morning of the duel, when he found her half-swooning in Madame de Plougastel's carriage, had been so discreet that it revealed nothing of his real interest in her. Therefore, it seemed only natural for someone who had to consider himself the cause of her distress. Similarly, Madame de Plougastel had never realized, nor did she realize now, that the hostility between the two men was more than political. Aline hadn't bothered to fully enlighten her. The quarrel was more than just the one that had already taken André-Louis to the Bois every day of the preceding week. But, at least, the Countess realized that even if André-Louis' resentment had no other source, that inconclusive duel was cause enough for Aline's fears.

So, the Countess had proposed this obvious deception. Aline had consented to be a passive participant. They had made the mistake of not fully forewarning and persuading Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr. They had trusted entirely that his anxiety to escape from Paris would keep him strictly within the role imposed upon him. They had not accounted for the strange sense of honor that motivated men like the Marquis, men raised on a code of pretenses.

André-Louis turned to scan the muffled figure, who advanced from the dark corners of the salon. As the light hit his white, lean face, the pseudo-footman flinched. The next moment, he too stepped forward into the light and swept his broad-brimmed hat from his brow. As he did so, André-Louis observed that his hand was fine and white, and a jewel flashed from one of his fingers. Then, André-Louis caught his breath and stiffened completely as he recognized the face revealed to him.

"Monsieur," the stern, proud man was saying, "I cannot take advantage of your ignorance. If these ladies can persuade you to save me, at least you deserve to know whom you are saving."

He stood there by the table, very erect and dignified. He was ready to perish as he had lived, if perish he must, without fear and without deception.

André-Louis came slowly forward until he reached the table on the other side. Then, at last, the muscles of his set face relaxed, and he laughed.

"You laugh?" said Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr, frowning and offended.

"It's so damnably amusing," said André-Louis.

"You have an odd sense of humor, Monsieur Moreau."

"Oh, I admit it. The unexpected always affects me so. I've found you many things in the course of our acquaintance. Tonight, you are the one thing I never expected to find you: an honest man."

Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr quivered. But he attempted no reply.

"Because of that, monsieur, I am inclined to be merciful. It's probably foolish. But you have surprised me into it. I give you three minutes, monsieur, to leave this house and take your own measures for your safety. What happens to you afterward will be no concern of mine."

"Ah, no, André! Listen..." Madame began in anguish.

"Pardon me, madame," André-Louis said. "This is the most I can do, and I'm already going against what I believe is my duty. If Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr stays, he not only ruins himself, but he puts you in danger. If he doesn't leave immediately, he'll go with me to the section headquarters. The section will have his head on a pike within the hour. He's a notorious counter-revolutionary, a knight of the dagger, one of those whom a furious populace is determined to wipe out. Now, monsieur, you know what awaits you. Make your decision immediately, for these ladies' sake."

"But you don't know, André-Louis!" Madame de Plougastel cried. She was in indescribable anguish. She came to him and clutched his arm. "For heaven's sake, André-Louis, be merciful with him! You must!"

"But that is exactly what I'm being, madame," he replied, "merciful. More merciful than he deserves. And he knows it. Fate has interfered very strangely in our lives to bring us together tonight. It's almost as if Fate is finally forcing him to face consequences. Yet, for your sakes, I won't take advantage of this, provided he does exactly what I've asked him to do, immediately."

From beyond the table, the Marquis now spoke icily. As he spoke, his right hand stirred under the ample folds of his greatcoat.

"I am glad, Monsieur Moreau, that you take that tone with me," the Marquis said. "You free me from my last hesitation. You spoke of Fate just now, and I must agree with you that Fate has interfered strangely, though perhaps not for the outcome you imagine. For years now, you have chosen to stand in my path and thwart me at every turn, always threatening me. You have persistently sought my life in various ways, first indirectly and at last directly. Your intervention in my affairs has ruined my highest hopes, perhaps more effectively than you realize. Throughout, you have been my evil genius. And you are even one of the agents of this climax of despair that I have reached tonight."

"Wait! Listen!" Madame de Plougastel was panting. She pulled away from André-Louis, as if moved by some premonition of what was about to happen. "Gervais! This is horrible!"

"Horrible, perhaps, but inevitable," the Marquis said. "He himself has invited it. I am a man in despair, a fugitive from a lost cause. That man holds the keys to escape. And besides, there is a reckoning to be paid between him and me."

His hand came from beneath the coat at last, armed with a pistol.

Madame de Plougastel screamed and threw herself upon him. Now on her knees, she clung to his arm with all her strength.

He tried in vain to shake himself free of that desperate clutch.

"Thérèse!" he cried. "Are you mad? Will you destroy me and yourself? This creature has the safe-conducts that mean our salvation. He himself is nothing."

From the background, Aline, a breathless, horror-struck spectator of that scene, spoke sharply, her quick mind pointing out the way to stop him.

"Burn the safe-conducts, André-Louis," she urged. "Burn them at once, in the candles there."

But André-Louis had taken advantage of Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr's helplessness in that moment to draw his own pistol. "I think it would be better to burn his brains instead," he said. "Stand away from him, madame."

Far from obeying that commanding order, Madame de Plougastel rose to her feet to cover the Marquis with her body. But she still clung to his arm, clinging to it with unexpected strength that continued to prevent him from attempting to use the pistol.

"André! For God's sake, André!" she panted hoarsely over her shoulder.

"Stand away, madame," he commanded her again, more sternly. "Let this murderer face what he deserves. He is jeopardizing all our lives, and his own life has been forfeit for years. Stand away!" He sprang forward, intending now to fire at his enemy over her shoulder, and Aline moved too late to hinder him.

"André! André!"

Panting, gasping, with a haggard face, almost on the verge of hysteria, the distraught Countess finally threw an effective, a terrible barrier between the hatred of those men, each determined to take the other's life.

"He is your father, André! Gervais, he is your son, our son! The letter there, on the table... Oh my God!" And she slipped limply to the ground, crouching there and sobbing at the feet of Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr.
