André-Louis was out on the terrace at Meudon the next morning, enjoying the fresh air. It was very early. The newly risen sun was turning the dewdrops on the lawn into diamonds. Five miles away, down in the valley, morning mists were rising over Paris. Even though it was so early, the house on the hill was already awake and bustling with preparations for their imminent departure.

André-Louis had safely escaped Paris last night with his mother and Aline. Today, all of them were to leave for Coblenz.

André-Louis was strolling there, his hands clasped behind him and his head hunched between his shoulders. Life had never given him so much to think about. Soon, Aline came through one of the glass doors from the library and joined him.

"You're up early," she greeted him.

"Yes, I am," he said. "I haven't been to bed." He assured her, in response to her surprised sound, "No, I spent the night, or what was left of it, sitting at the window and thinking."

"My poor André!"

"You describe me perfectly," he replied. "I am very poor, for I know nothing, understand nothing. It's not a disastrous condition until you realize it. Then..." He threw out his arms, then let them fall again. She noticed his face was very drawn and haggard.

She walked with him along the old granite balustrade, where geraniums draped their green and scarlet leaves.

"Have you decided what you're going to do?" she asked him.

"I've decided I have no choice," he said. "I, too, must emigrate. I'm lucky to be able to do so. I'm lucky I found no one amidst yesterday's chaos in Paris to whom I could foolishly report myself. Otherwise, I might no longer be armed with these." He drew the powerful passport of the Commission of Twelve from his pocket. It ordered all Frenchmen to give him any assistance he might need and warned anyone who thought of hindering him that they did so at their own risk. He spread it before her. "With this, I'll take all of you safely to the frontier. Once we're across the frontier, Monsieur de Kercadiou and Madame de Plougastel will have to take me. Then we'll be even."

"Even?" she asked. "But you won't be able to return!"

"You can imagine, of course, how eager I am to do so," he replied. "My child, in a day or two, there will be inquiries. People will ask what has become of me. Things will come out. Then the hunt will start. But by then, we'll be well on our way, far ahead of any possible pursuit. You don't imagine I could ever give the government a satisfactory explanation for my absence, do you? Assuming, of course, that any government remains to explain it to."

"You mean... you'll sacrifice your future, this career you've started?" The thought took her breath away.

"Given the state of things, there's no career for me down there," he explained, "at least no honest one. And I hope you don't think I could be dishonest. This is the day of the Dantons and the Marats, the day of the rabble. The reins of government will be thrown to the common people. Or else the common people, drunk with the arrogance that the Dantons and Marats have filled them with, will seize control by force. Chaos must follow. It will be a despotism of brutes and apes, a government of the whole by its lowest parts. It cannot last. Unless a nation is ruled by its best elements, it must wither and decay."

"I thought you were a republican," she said.

"Why, so I am," he affirmed. "I'm talking like one. I want a society that chooses its rulers from the best people in every class. It should deny any single class or group the right to take over the government for itself, whether it's the nobles, the clergy, the bourgeoisie, or the proletariat. Because government by any one class is disastrous for everyone's well-being. Two years ago, our ideal seemed to have come true. The monopoly of power had been taken from the class that held it too long and too unjustly, simply by the empty right of heredity. Power had been distributed as evenly as possible throughout the State. If people had only stopped there, everything would have been fine. But our momentum carried us too far. The privileged orders provoked us with their very opposition. The result is the horror you only saw the beginning of yesterday. No, no," he concluded. "There might be careers for corrupt officials, for opportunists, but none for a man who wants to respect himself. It's time to go. I'm making no sacrifice by leaving."

"But where will you go? What will you do?"

"Oh, something," he said. "Consider that in four years, I've been a lawyer, a politician, a swordsman, and a buffoon, especially the latter. There's always a place in the world for Scaramouche. Besides, did you know that, unlike Scaramouche, I've been oddly provident? I own a small farm in Saxony. I think agriculture might suit me. It's a meditative occupation. And when all is said and done, I'm not a man of action. I don't have the qualities for that role."

She looked up into his face. A wistful smile played in her deep blue eyes.

"Is there any role for which you don't have the qualities, I wonder?"

"Do you really think so?" he asked. "Yet you can't say I've made a success of any of the parts I've played. I've always ended up running away. I'm running away now from a thriving fencing academy, which will likely become the property of Le Duc. That's what comes from getting into politics, which I'm also running away from. It's the one thing I truly excel at. That, too, is a trait of Scaramouche."

"Why do you always make fun of yourself?" she wondered.

"Because I recognize myself as part of this mad world, I suppose," he answered. "You wouldn't want me to take it seriously, would you? I'd completely lose my mind if I did, especially since discovering my parents."

"Don't, André!" she begged him. "You're being insincere, you know."

"Of course I am," he said. "Do you expect sincerity from people when hypocrisy is the very essence of human nature? We're raised on it. We're taught it. We live by it, and we rarely even realize it. You've seen it run wild and out of control in France over the past four years: pretense and hypocrisy on the lips of the revolutionaries, pretense and hypocrisy on the lips of those who supported the old regime. It's a riot of hypocrisy that ultimately breeds chaos. And I, who criticize it all on this beautiful, God-given morning, am the most blatant and contemptible hypocrite of all. This, the realization of this truth, kept me awake all night. For two years, I've persecuted Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr by every means in my power."

He paused before saying the name, as if hesitating how to speak of him.

"And in those two years," he continued, "I've deceived myself about the motive that was driving me. He spoke of me last night as the evil genius of his life, and he himself recognized the truth in that. It may be that he was right. Because of that, it's probable that even if he hadn't killed Philippe de Vilmorin, things would still have turned out the same. In fact, today I know they must have. That's why I call myself a hypocrite, a poor, self-deceiving hypocrite."

"But why, André?"

He stood still and looked at her. "Because he pursued you, Aline. That alone would have made me completely unyielding and set against him. Because of that, I would have strained every nerve to bring him down, all to save you from becoming a victim of your own ambition."

"I want to speak of him as little as possible. After this, I hope never to speak of him again. Before our paths crossed, I knew him for what he was. I knew the rumors about him that spread through the countryside. Even then, I found him detestable. Last night, you heard him mention the unfortunate La Binet. You heard him offer his lifestyle and upbringing as an excuse for his actions. I suppose there's no real answer to that. He fits the mold. Enough! But to me, he represented evil, just as you have always represented good. He was the embodiment of sin, just as you are the embodiment of purity. I had placed you so high, Aline, so high, yet no higher than you deserved. Could I then allow ambition to drag you down? Could I let the evil I detested join with the good I loved? What could have come of it but your ruin, as I told you that day at Gavrillac? Because of that, my hatred for him became personal and active. I resolved to save you at all costs from such a horrible fate. If you had been able to tell me you loved him, it would have been different. I would have hoped that in a union blessed by love, you would have raised him to your own pure standards. But for you to lovelessly agree to marry him for worldly advancement... Oh, it was vile and hopeless. So I fought him, like a rat fighting a lion. I fought him relentlessly until I saw that love had replaced ambition in your heart. Then I stopped."

"Until you saw that love had taken the place of ambition!" Tears had been gathering in her eyes while he was speaking. Now, amazement replaced her other emotions. "But when did you see that? When?"

"I, I was mistaken. I know it now. Yet, at the time... surely, Aline, that morning when you came to beg me not to go through with my duel with him in the Bois, you were concerned for *him*?"

"For him! It was concern for *you*," she cried, without thinking.

But it did not convince him. "For me? When you knew, when all the world knew what I had been doing daily for a week!"

"Ah, but he, he was different from the others you had met. His reputation was high. My uncle considered him invincible. He persuaded me that if you fought him, nothing could save you."

He looked at her, frowning.

"Why this, Aline?" he asked her with some sternness. "I can understand that, having changed since then, you would now want to deny those feelings. It's a woman's way, I suppose."

"Oh, what are you saying, Andre? How wrong you are! I have told you the truth!"

He asked her, "And was it concern for me that made you faint when you saw him return wounded from the duel? That was what opened my eyes."

"Wounded? I hadn't seen his wound. I saw him sitting alive and apparently unhurt in his carriage, and I concluded that he had killed you, just as he said he would. What else could I conclude?"

He saw a dazzling, blinding light, and it scared him. He recoiled, pressing a hand to his forehead. "And that was why you fainted?" he asked, incredulously.

She looked at him without answering. As she began to realize how much her eagerness to make him understand his mistake had led her to say, a sudden fear crept into her eyes.

He held out both hands to her.

"Aline! Aline!" His voice broke on her name. "It was I..."

"Oh, blind Andre, it was always you, always! Never, never did I think of him, not even for a loveless marriage, except once for a little while, when... when that theater girl came into your life, and then..." She broke off, shrugged, and turned her head away. "I thought of pursuing ambition, since there was nothing else left to pursue."

He shook himself. "I am dreaming, of course, or else I am mad," he said.

"Blind, Andre; just blind," she assured him.

"Blind only where it would have been arrogant to have seen."

"And yet," she answered him with a flash of the Aline he had known of old, "I have never found you lacking in arrogance."

Monsieur de Kercadiou, emerging a moment later from the library window, saw them holding hands and staring at each other beatifically, as if each saw Paradise in the other's face.
