[Book 3 - Chapter 10: The Returning Carriage]

Chapter 10. The Returning Carriage

M. de Kercadiou wrote a letter.

"Godson," he began, without any kind words to soften the blow. "I have learned with pain and anger that you have disgraced yourself once again. You broke the promise you made to me to stay out of politics. I am even more pained and angry to learn that your name has become a public joke in just a few short days. You have thrown away the weapon of false and tricky arguments against my class, which is the class you owe everything to. Instead, you have taken up the sword of an assassin. I have found out that you have a duel scheduled tomorrow with my good friend, M. de La Tour d'Azyr. A gentleman in his position has certain obligations tied to his noble birth. These obligations do not allow him to back out of a duel. However, you do not have to worry about those disadvantages. For a man of your social class, refusing a duel or ignoring one after it is made does not require any real sacrifice. Your equals would probably think you were just being sensibly cautious. Therefore, I am begging you to stop this right now. If I thought I still had any authority over you because of all the favors I have done for you, I would order you to let this matter go no further. I would order you not to show up for your duel tomorrow morning. But your recent behavior makes it clear that I do not have that kind of authority. I have no reason to hope that any sense of gratitude toward me will make you listen to my very serious request. Because of this, I must add one final thing. If you survive tomorrow's duel, I can never, under any circumstances, acknowledge your existence ever again. If you have even a tiny bit of the affection left that you once claimed to have for me, you will not refuse to do what I am asking. This letter is driven mostly by my own affection for you, even though you have done everything possible to destroy it."

It was not a very thoughtful letter. M. de Kercadiou was not a very thoughtful man. André-Louis read the letter when a groom brought it to him in Paris on that Sunday afternoon. But no matter how he read it, André-Louis only saw concern for M. La Tour d'Azyr, whom M. de Kercadiou called his good friend and his future nephew-in-law.

He made the groom wait a full hour while he wrote his reply. It was a short letter, but it took a lot of effort and several failed attempts. In the end, this is what he wrote:

"My Godfather, you make it incredibly hard for me to refuse you when you appeal to my affection. I will spend my entire life looking for chances to prove my affection to you. Because of that, I am more devastated than I can ever express that I cannot give you the proof you are asking for today. There is too much history between M. de La Tour d'Azyr and me. Also, you are being very unfair to me and my social class, whatever that class might be. You are wrong when you say that obligations of honor do not apply to us. I take those obligations so seriously that I could not back out now even if I wanted to.

"If you decide to go through with the harsh punishment you threatened, I will just have to endure it. But you can be absolutely sure that I will suffer.

"Your affectionate and grateful godson,

"André-Louis."

He sent that letter back with M. de Kercadiou's groom. He assumed that would be the end of the whole situation. The letter hurt him deeply, but he handled the pain with the outward calm that he always liked to show.

The next morning, it was a quarter past eight. He was eating breakfast with Le Chapelier, who had come over to eat with him. Just as they were getting up from the table to head to the Bois de Boulogne, his housekeeper surprised him. She announced that Aline de Kercadiou had arrived.

He looked at his watch. His carriage was already waiting at the door, but he had a few minutes to spare. He excused himself from Le Chapelier and walked quickly out to the waiting room.

She walked forward to meet him. Her manner was eager, almost feverish.

"I will not pretend that I do not know why you are here," he said quickly, to save time. "But time is running out, and I must warn you that only the strongest reasons will be worth hearing."

His words surprised her. It felt like a rejection right from the start, before she had even said a single word. That was the absolute last thing she had expected from André-Louis. On top of that, he seemed unusually distant with her, and his voice was strangely cold and formal.

His coldness hurt her. She had no way of guessing the conclusion he had jumped to. He was making the exact same mistake with her that he had made with his godfather's letter the day before. This was a natural mistake to make, after all. He assumed that her only reason for being there was out of concern for M. de La Tour d'Azyr. It never even crossed his mind that she might be worried about him. He was completely convinced about how the duel would end, so he could not even imagine that anyone would be afraid for him.

When he thought M. de Kercadiou was worried about the doomed victim, it had annoyed him. But seeing the same anxiety in Aline filled him with a cold anger. He told himself that she had not been completely honest with him. He assumed that her ambition was pushing her to accept a marriage proposal from M. de La Tour d'Azyr. There was absolutely nothing that could have pushed him harder toward his goal. In his eyes, saving her was almost as important as getting revenge for the past.

She looked at him closely. His complete calm in such a situation amazed her, and she could not help but mention it.

"You are so calm, André!"

"I am not easily upset. It is something I pride myself on."

"But... Oh, André, this duel simply cannot happen!" She stepped close to him and put her hands on his shoulders. She stood there, her face just a foot away from his.

"I assume you know of some good reason why it shouldn't?" he asked.

"You might be killed," she answered, and her eyes grew wide as she spoke.

Her answer was so different from what he had expected that he could only stare at her for a moment. Then he thought he understood her game. He laughed as he pulled her hands off his shoulders and stepped back. He thought this was a shallow trick, and it felt childish and beneath her.

"Do you honestly think you can stop me by trying to scare me?" he asked, almost sneering.

"Oh, you must be completely mad! M. de La Tour d'Azyr is known as the most dangerous swordsman in France."

"Have you ever noticed that most reputations are not actually deserved? Chabrillane was a dangerous swordsman, and now Chabrillane is buried in the ground. La Motte-Royau was supposed to be an even more dangerous swordsman, and right now he is recovering in a doctor's care. The same thing happened to all the other hired duelists who dreamed of stabbing a poor, helpless country lawyer. And today, the absolute best of these bully-swordsmen is coming to face me. He is coming to collect wages that are long overdue. You can be absolutely sure of that. So, unless you have another reason to suggest..."

His sarcasm completely confused her. Could he really be sincere when he said he was guaranteed to beat M. de La Tour d'Azyr? With her limited knowledge, and with her mind full of her uncle's belief that André-Louis would lose, it seemed to her that André-Louis was just putting on an act. She thought he was going to play a part right up until the very end.

Whatever the truth was, she changed her strategy to answer him.

"Did you receive my uncle's letter?"

"I did, and I answered it."

"I know. But he will do exactly what he said he would. Do not fool yourself into thinking he will change his mind if you go through with this horrible plan."

"Now listen, that is a much better reason than your first one," he said. "If there is a single reason in the whole world that could change my mind, it would be that one. But there is simply too much history between La Tour d'Azyr and me. I swore an oath on the dead hand of Philippe de Vilmorin. I never could have hoped that God would give me such a perfect chance to keep that promise."

"But you haven't kept it yet," she warned him.

He smiled at her. "That is true!" he said. "But nine o'clock will be here very soon. Tell me," he asked her suddenly. "Why didn't you take this request to M. de La Tour d'Azyr?"

"I did," she answered him. She blushed as she remembered how he had rejected her the day before. But André-Louis completely misunderstood why her face turned red.

"And what did he say?" he asked.

"M. de La Tour d'Azyr has obligations..." she started to say, but then she stopped and gave a short answer. "Oh, he refused."

"Well, well. He has to refuse, of course, no matter what it might cost him. But if I were in his place, I would not have cared about the cost at all. But men are all different, as you can see." He sighed. "Also, if I were in your place, and he had refused me, I think I would have just let the matter drop. But then again..."

"I don't understand what you mean, André."

"I am not being very mysterious. I can be much more mysterious than this. Just think about it for a while. It might help comfort you later." He checked his watch again. "Please, make yourself at home here. I really have to go."

Le Chapelier poked his head in through the doorway.

"I am sorry to interrupt, but we are going to be late, André, unless you..."

"I am coming," André answered him. "Aline, you would be doing me a huge favor if you would wait here until I get back. This is especially important because of your uncle's decision."

She did not answer him. She felt completely numb. He assumed her silence meant she agreed, so he bowed and left her standing there. She listened to his footsteps going down the stairs with Le Chapelier. He was talking to his friend, and his voice sounded perfectly calm and normal.

Oh, he was completely mad! He was blinded by his own self-confidence and vanity. As his carriage rattled away down the street, she sat down weakly. She felt exhausted and sick to her stomach. She was dizzy and nauseous with horror. André-Louis was driving straight to his death. She felt a deep, unexplainable certainty about this, probably because of all the things M. de Kercadiou had been saying. She sat there for a while, completely paralyzed by a feeling of hopelessness. Then she jumped up again, wringing her hands in distress. She had to do something to stop this tragedy. But what could she possibly do? If she followed him to the Bois de Boulogne and tried to interrupt the duel, she would just cause a massive scandal for no reason. All the rules of polite society were working against her, and they formed a wall that she could not just climb over. Was there absolutely no one who could help her?

She stood there, almost frantic with helplessness. Then she heard the sound of wheels and horse hooves on the cobblestone street outside. A carriage was coming down the street. It stopped with a loud clatter right in front of the fencing academy. Could it be André-Louis coming back? She desperately grabbed onto that tiny sliver of hope. Someone knocked loudly and urgently on the front door. She heard André-Louis's housekeeper hurrying down the stairs in her clanking wooden shoes to open it.

She ran to the door of the waiting room, pulled it wide open, and stood there holding her breath to listen. But the voice that drifted up the stairs was not the voice she was so desperately hoping to hear. It was a woman's voice asking urgently for M. André-Louis. At first, the voice sounded vaguely familiar, and then she recognized it clearly. It was the voice of Madame de Plougastel.

Full of excitement, she ran to the top of the narrow staircase just in time to hear Madame de Plougastel cry out in a panic.

"He has already gone! Oh, but how long ago did he leave? Which way did he go?"

That was enough to tell Aline that Madame de Plougastel must be there for the exact same reason she was. Her mind was in such a state of distress and confusion that she was entirely focused on the most important issue. Because of that, she did not even find this strange. She simply assumed that Madame de Plougastel's unusual fondness for André-Louis was the only explanation needed.

Without even stopping to think, she ran down the steep stairs and called out.

"Madame! Madame!"

The plump, friendly housekeeper stepped out of the way, and the two ladies stood face to face in the doorway. Madame de Plougastel looked pale and exhausted, and a nameless fear was staring out of her eyes.

"Aline! You are here!" she exclaimed. Then, completely ignoring all the minor details because of the emergency, she asked, "Were you too late as well?"

"No, Madame. I saw him, and I begged him to stop. But he refused to listen."

"Oh, this is absolutely horrible!" Madame de Plougastel shivered as she spoke. "I only heard about this half an hour ago, and I came here immediately to stop it no matter what."

The two women stared at each other with blank, despairing looks. Out in the sunny street, one or two shabby-looking people walking by stopped to stare. They were looking at the beautiful carriage with its magnificent bay horses, and the two wealthy ladies standing in the doorway of the fencing academy. From across the street, they heard the rough voice of a traveling bellows-mender shouting out his trade.

"A raccommoder les vieux soufflets! Mending old bellows!"

Madame turned quickly back to the housekeeper.

"How long ago did he leave?"

"Maybe ten minutes ago. It was hardly more than that." The good housekeeper thought these wealthy ladies were friends of her unbeatable master's newest victim, so she kept a completely solid, emotionless face.

Madame wrung her hands. "Ten minutes! Oh!" It sounded almost like a moan. "Which way did he go?"

"The duel is scheduled for nine o'clock in the Bois de Boulogne," Aline told her. "Could we follow him? Could we even stop them if we did?"

"Ah, my God! The real question is whether we will get there in time. At nine o'clock! And it is only a little more than fifteen minutes away. My God! My God!" Madame squeezed her hands together in agony. "Do you at least know exactly where in the Bois they are meeting?"

"No, I only know that it is in the Bois."

"In the Bois!" Madame went into an absolute frenzy. "The Bois is almost half as big as Paris itself." But she rushed on breathlessly, "Come on, Aline! Get in the carriage, get in!"

Then she shouted to her coachman. "Drive to the Bois de Boulogne by way of the Cours la Reine," she ordered him. "Drive as fast as you possibly can. I will give you ten pistoles if we make it in time. Use your whip, man!"

She pushed Aline into the carriage and jumped in right after her with the energy of a young girl. The heavy carriage was far too big for this kind of race against time, but it was already moving before she even sat down. It rocked and bounced down the street. The driver narrowly missed crushing several people against walls or running them over, and he earned plenty of curses as he went.

Madame leaned back with her eyes closed and her lips trembling. Her face looked very pale and tense. Aline watched her without saying a word. It almost seemed like Madame de Plougastel was suffering just as much as she was, enduring an agony of fear that was equal to her own.

Aline would wonder about this later on. But right at that moment, her half-numbed mind could only focus on their desperate mission.

The carriage finally rolled across the Place Louis XV and out onto the Cours la Reine. This was a beautiful, tree-lined road between the Champs Elysees and the Seine. It was almost completely empty at this time of day, so they made much better speed, leaving a thick cloud of dust behind them.

But even though they were going dangerously fast, it still felt too slow for the women inside the carriage. As they reached the barrier gate at the end of the Cours, the city clocks behind them began striking nine o'clock. Every single chime sounded like a death knell.

Even in this rush, the rules forced them to stop for a moment at the barrier. Aline asked the guard in charge how long ago a carriage matching André-Louis's description had gone through. He answered that a carriage carrying the deputy M. le Chapelier and the hero of the Third Estate, M. Moreau, had passed the barrier about twenty minutes ago. The guard was very well informed. He grinned and said he could make a pretty good guess about the kind of business that was taking M. Moreau out that way so early in the morning.

They left him behind and sped out into the open country, following the road that stayed close to the river. They sat back in silent despair, staring hopelessly out the window. Aline held tightly onto Madame's hand. In the distance, across the fields to their right, they could already see the long, dark line of trees that marked the edge of the Bois. Soon, the carriage turned right onto a smaller road, heading away from the river and straight toward the forest.

Aline finally broke the hopeless silence that had hung between them since they left the barrier.

"Oh, it is completely impossible that we will get there in time! Impossible!"

"Don't say that! Don't say that!" Madame cried out.

"But it is long past nine o'clock, Madame! André is always on time, and these... these affairs do not take very long. It... it will all be over by now."

Madame shivered and closed her eyes. After a moment, though, she opened them again and shifted in her seat. Then she stuck her head out the window. "There is a carriage coming towards us," she announced, and her voice was filled with the terrible thing she feared.

"Not already! Oh, not already!" Aline said, putting their shared fear into words. She suddenly felt like she couldn't breathe, and she desperately needed air. Something in her throat was throbbing so hard it felt like it would choke her, and a dark mist kept clouding her vision.

An open carriage was speeding toward them in a cloud of dust, coming away from the Bois. They watched it approach. Both of them were pale, and neither of them dared to speak. In fact, Aline was so terrified she couldn't even catch her breath to say a word.

As the carriage got closer, it had to slow down, just like they did, so they could pass each other safely on the narrow road. Aline and Madame de Plougastel were both leaning out the window. With terrified eyes, they looked into the open carriage as it pulled up right next to them.

"Which one of them is it, Madame? Oh, which one?" Aline gasped. She barely dared to look, and her head was spinning.

A young man with dark skin sat on the side closest to them. Neither of the ladies knew who he was. He was smiling as he talked to the man sitting next to him. A second later, the other man came into view. He was not smiling at all. His face was pale and hard, and it was the face of the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr.

For a long moment, both women stared at him in speechless horror. Finally, he noticed them, and absolute surprise washed over his stern face.

In that exact moment, Aline let out a long, shuddering sigh. She fainted completely and collapsed onto the carriage floor behind Madame de Plougastel.
