[Chapter 11. Inferences]

André-Louis arrived at the dueling ground several minutes early, despite a slight delay in their departure. Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr was already there, waiting for him. He was accompanied by Monsieur d’Ormesson, a dark-complexioned young gentleman wearing the blue uniform of a captain in the Gardes du Corps.

André-Louis had been silent and lost in thought during the entire drive. He was troubled by his recent conversation with Mademoiselle de Kercadiou and the hasty conclusions he had drawn about her intentions.

He had said, "Decidedly, this man must be killed."

Le Chapelier had not answered him. The Breton had almost shuddered at his compatriot's cold-bloodedness. Lately, he had often thought that this man Moreau was hardly human. He also found him incomprehensibly inconsistent. When this business of killing hired swordsmen, this "spadassinicide," was first suggested to him, he had been very haughty and disdainful. Yet, once he accepted it, he sometimes approached it with a ghoulish, revolting flippancy, and at other times with an even more revolting detachment.

Their preparations were made quickly and silently, without undue haste or any sign of nervousness from either side. A grim determination filled both men. The opponent had to be killed; there could be no half-measures. They stripped off their coats and waistcoats, removed their shoes, and rolled their shirt-sleeves to their elbows. Finally, they faced each other, both resolved to settle the long-standing score between them completely. I doubt either man had any doubt about the outcome.

Le Chapelier and the young captain stood opposite each other, alert and watchful, beside the duelists.

"Allez, messieurs!"

The slender, wickedly delicate blades clashed together. After a momentary glissade, they whirled, swift and bright as lightning, almost impossible to follow with the eye. The Marquis attacked first, impetuously and vigorously. André-Louis realized almost immediately that he was facing an opponent of a very different caliber than the duelists he had fought last week, even including the fearsome La Motte-Royau.

This was a man whose extensive and constant practice had given him extraordinary speed and an almost perfect technique. Furthermore, he had physical advantages over André-Louis in strength and reach, which made him truly formidable. He was also cool, self-possessed, fearless, and purposeful. André-Louis wondered if anything could shake that calm.

André-Louis wanted the punishment to be as complete as possible. He wasn't content just to kill the Marquis as the Marquis had killed Philippe. He wanted the Marquis to first experience the same powerlessness to prevent his own death that Philippe had felt. Nothing less would satisfy André-Louis. Monsieur le Marquis had to begin by tasting that cup of despair. It was part of the reckoning; part of the payment due.

André-Louis parried the heavy lunge, which concluded that first series of passes, with a breaking sweep. He actually laughed, gleefully, like a boy enjoying a sport he loves.

That extraordinary, ill-timed laugh made Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr's recovery hastier and less dignified than it would have been otherwise. It startled and unsettled him. He was already unsettled by his failure to land such a beautifully timed and perfectly delivered lunge.

He, too, had realized that his opponent's skill was greater than anything he had expected, even for a fencing master. Because of this, he had put forth his utmost energy to end the fight immediately.

More than the actual parry, the accompanying laugh made that "end" seem like nothing more than a beginning. Yet, it was the end of something significant. It was the end of the absolute confidence that had previously filled Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr. He no longer saw the outcome as a foregone conclusion. He realized that if he wanted to win this encounter, he would have to proceed cautiously and fence as he had never fenced before in his life.

They settled down again. This time, on the principle that the soundest defense is attack, the Marquis took the offensive. André-Louis allowed him to, even wanted him to. He wanted the Marquis to exhaust himself and his magnificent speed against the greater speed that nearly two years of continuous daily fencing had given the master. With a beautiful, easy pressure of his blade's strong part on the Marquis's weak part, André-Louis kept himself completely covered in that second exchange, which again ended in a lunge.

Expecting it now, André-Louis parried with nothing more than a deflecting touch. At the same moment, he suddenly stepped forward, right inside the Marquis's guard. This placed his opponent so completely at his mercy that the Marquis, as if fascinated, didn't even try to recover.

This time, André-Louis did not laugh. He simply smiled into Monsieur de La Tour d’Azyr's widening eyes and made no move to use his advantage.

He told him sharply, "Come, come, monsieur! Am I to run my blade through an uncovered man?" Deliberately, he fell back while his shaken opponent finally recovered.

Monsieur d’Ormesson let out the breath that horror had momentarily stolen from him. Le Chapelier swore softly, muttering:

"Name of a name! It is tempting Providence to play the fool in this fashion!"

André-Louis noticed the ashen pallor that now spread across his opponent's face.

"I think you begin to realize, monsieur, what Philippe de Vilmorin must have felt that day at Gavrillac," he said. "I wanted you to experience that first. Since that is accomplished, well, here's to make an end."

He attacked with lightning speed. For a moment, his blade seemed to La Tour d’Azyr to be everywhere at once. Then, from a low engagement in sixte, André-Louis stretched forward with swift and vigorous ease to lunge in tierce. He drove his point to pierce his opponent, who a series of calculated disengages had left exposed in that line. But to André-Louis's amazement and chagrin, La Tour d’Azyr parried the stroke. Even more to his chagrin, La Tour d’Azyr parried it just too late. If he had completely parried it, all would still have been well. But striking the blade in the last fraction of a second, the Marquis deflected the point from the line of his body. However, he didn't deflect it completely enough, and a couple of feet of that hard-driven steel tore through the muscles of his sword-arm.

To the seconds, none of these details had been visible. All they had seen was a swift whirl of flashing blades. Then, André-Louis stretched almost to the ground in an upward lunge that had pierced the Marquis’s right arm just below the shoulder.

The sword fell from La Tour d’Azyr’s suddenly relaxed, powerless fingers. He stood disarmed, his lip caught between his teeth, his face white, and his chest heaving, before his opponent, who had instantly recovered. With the blood-tinged tip of his sword resting on the ground, André-Louis surveyed him grimly. He looked like someone surveying prey that, through their own clumsiness, had escaped at the last moment.

In the National Assembly and in the newspapers, this might be hailed as another victory for the Paladin of the Third Estate. Only André-Louis himself could know the full extent and bitterness of his failure.

Monsieur d’Ormesson had sprung to his principal's side.

He had cried stupidly, "You are hurt!"

"It is nothing," La Tour d'Azyr said. "A scratch." But his lip twisted, and the torn sleeve of his fine cambric shirt was full of blood.

D'Ormesson, a practical man in such situations, pulled out a linen handkerchief. He quickly tore it into strips to make a makeshift bandage.

André-Louis continued to stand there, watching as if dazed. He stayed that way until Le Chapelier touched his arm. Then, finally, he snapped out of it, sighed, and turned away to put his clothes back on. He didn't speak to or even look at his recent opponent again. Instead, he left the area immediately.

As he walked slowly with Le Chapelier, in quiet sadness, towards the entrance of the Bois where they had left their carriage, they were passed by the caleche. This carriage carried La Tour d'Azyr and his second. It had originally driven almost right up to the place of the duel. The Marquis's wounded arm was held in a sling made from his companion's sword-belt. His sky-blue coat with its three collars had been buttoned over this, so the right sleeve hung empty. Apart from being a bit pale, he mostly looked like his usual self.

Now you understand why he was the first to return. Seeing him come back, apparently safe and sound, the two ladies had been focused on stopping the duel. They must have assumed their worst fears were realized.

Madame de Plougastel tried to call out, but her voice failed her. She tried to throw open her carriage door, but her fingers fumbled awkwardly, unable to open it. Meanwhile, the caleche was slowly passing. La Tour d'Azyr's fine eyes met her distressed gaze with a dark, intense look. Then she saw something else. Monsieur d'Ormesson leaned back from his forward position to join his companion in greeting the Countess. As he did, he revealed the empty right sleeve of Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr's blue coat. What's more, the side of the coat near her, where it was fastened by a single button at the throat, had turned back. This exposed the slung arm underneath, its cambric sleeve soaked with blood.

Even now, she was afraid to jump to the obvious conclusion. She feared that perhaps the Marquis, though wounded himself, might have given his opponent a deadlier wound.

She found her voice at last. At the same moment, she motioned for the caleche driver to stop.

As it came to a stop, Monsieur d'Ormesson stepped out. He met the Countess in the small space between the two carriages.

"Where is Monsieur Moreau?" she asked, surprising him.

"Following at his leisure, no doubt, Madame," he answered, regaining his composure.

"He is not hurt?"

"Unfortunately, it is we who..." Monsieur d'Ormesson began. From behind him, Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr's voice cut in sharply.

"This interest on your part in Monsieur Moreau, dear Countess..."

He broke off, noticing a subtle challenge in her demeanor as she faced him. His sentence didn't need to be finished, in fact.

There was a vaguely awkward pause. Then she looked at Monsieur d'Ormesson. Her manner changed. She offered what seemed to be an explanation for her concern about Monsieur Moreau.

"Mademoiselle de Kercadiou is with me. The poor child has fainted."

There was more, a lot more, she would have said just then, if not for Monsieur d'Ormesson being there.

Deeply concerned for Mademoiselle de Kercadiou, de La Tour d'Azyr stood up quickly despite his wound.

"I am in poor case to render assistance, Madame," he said, a faint, apologetic smile on his pale face. "But..."

With d'Ormesson's help, and despite d'Ormesson's objections, he got down from the caleche. The caleche then moved a short distance to clear the road for another carriage coming from the Bois.

And so it happened that a few moments later, when that approaching cabriolet caught up with and passed the stopped carriages, André-Louis saw a very touching scene. Standing up for a better view, he saw Aline in a half-fainting state. She was starting to come around now, sitting in the carriage doorway, with Madame de Plougastel supporting her. Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr, looking deeply concerned despite his wound, was leaning over the girl. While behind him stood Monsieur d'Ormesson and the Countess's footman.

The Countess looked up and saw him as he was driven past. Her face brightened. It almost seemed to him she was about to greet him or call out. To avoid an awkward situation, given his recent opponent's presence, he preempted her by bowing coldly. His mood was indeed cold, made even colder by what he was seeing. Then he sat back down, looking straight ahead.

Could anything have more completely strengthened his belief that Aline had come to beg him that morning because of Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr? What his eyes had seen, of course, was a lady overwhelmed with emotion at the sight of her dear friend's blood. And that same dear friend was reassuring her that his injury was far from fatal. Later, much later, he would blame his own stubborn foolishness. He was almost too harsh in judging himself. How else could he have interpreted the scene he saw, given his existing assumptions?

What he had already been suspecting, he now considered proven. Aline had been lacking honesty about her feelings towards Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr. It was, he supposed, a woman's way to be secretive in such matters, and he mustn't blame her. Nor could he blame her in his heart for having fallen for the unique charm of a man like the Marquis. Even his hostility couldn't blind him to Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr's appeal. He thought her weakness, which had overcome her upon seeing him wounded, betrayed this.

"My God!" he cried out. "What must she have suffered, then, if I had killed him as I meant to!"

If only she had been honest with him, she could have so easily gained his agreement to her request. If only she had told him what he now saw—that she loved Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr—instead of letting him assume her only interest in the Marquis was based on unworthy worldly ambition, he would have given in at once.

He sighed, and said a silent prayer for forgiveness to Vilmorin's memory.

"Perhaps it's a good thing my lunge missed," he said.

"What do you mean?" Le Chapelier wondered.

In this business, I must give up all hope of starting over.
