[Book III - Chapter VI: POLITICIANS]

CHAPTER VI. POLITICIANS

One morning in August the academy in the Rue du Hasard was invaded by Le
Chapelier accompanied by a man of remarkable appearance, whose
herculean stature and disfigured countenance seemed vaguely familiar
to Andre-Louis. He was a man of little, if anything, over thirty, with
small bright eyes buried in an enormous face. His cheek-bones were
prominent, his nose awry, as if it had been broken by a blow, and his
mouth was rendered almost shapeless by the scars of another injury. (A
bull had horned him in the face when he was but a lad.) As if that were
not enough to render his appearance terrible, his cheeks were deeply
pock-marked. He was dressed untidily in a long scarlet coat that
descended almost to his ankles, soiled buckskin breeches and boots with
reversed tops. His shirt, none too clean, was open at the throat, the
collar hanging limply over an unknotted cravat, displaying fully the
muscular neck that rose like a pillar from his massive shoulders. He
swung a cane that was almost a club in his left hand, and there was a
cockade in his biscuit-coloured, conical hat. He carried himself with an
aggressive, masterful air, that great head of his thrown back as if he
were eternally at defiance.

Le Chapelier, whose manner was very grave, named him to Andre-Louis.

“This is M. Danton, a brother-lawyer, President of the Cordeliers, of
whom you will have heard.”

Of course Andre-Louis had heard of him. Who had not, by then?

Looking at him now with interest, Andre-Louis wondered how it came that
all, or nearly all the leading innovators, were pock-marked. Mirabeau,
the journalist Desmoulins, the philanthropist Marat, Robespierre the
little lawyer from Arras, this formidable fellow Danton, and several
others he could call to mind all bore upon them the scars of smallpox.
Almost he began to wonder was there any connection between the two.
Did an attack of smallpox produce certain moral results which found
expression in this way?

He dismissed the idle speculation, or rather it was shattered by the
startling thunder of Danton’s voice.

“This ------ Chapelier has told me of you. He says that you are a patriotic
------.”

More than by the tone was Andre-Louis startled by the obscenities with
which the Colossus did not hesitate to interlard his first speech to a
total stranger. He laughed outright. There was nothing else to do.

“If he has told you that, he has told you more than the truth! I am a
patriot. The rest my modesty compels me to disavow.”

“You’re a joker too, it seems,” roared the other, but he laughed
nevertheless, and the volume of it shook the windows. “There’s no
offence in me. I am like that.”

“What a pity,” said Andre-Louis.

It disconcerted the king of the markets. “Eh? what’s this, Chapelier?
Does he give himself airs, your friend here?”

The spruce Breton, a very petit-maitre in appearance by contrast with
his companion, but nevertheless of a down-right manner quite equal to
Danton’s in brutality, though dispensing with the emphasis of foulness,
shrugged as he answered him:

“It is merely that he doesn’t like your manners, which is not at all
surprising. They are execrable.”

“Ah, bah! You are all like that, you ------ Bretons. Let’s come to
business. You’ll have heard what took place in the Assembly yesterday?
You haven’t? My God, where do you live? Have you heard that this
scoundrel who calls himself King of France gave passage across French
soil the other day to Austrian troops going to crush those who fight for
liberty in Belgium? Have you heard that, by any chance?”

“Yes,” said Andre-Louis coldly, masking his irritation before the
other’s hectoring manner. “I have heard that.”

“Oh! And what do you think of it?” Arms akimbo, the Colossus towered
above him.

Andre-Louis turned aside to Le Chapelier.

“I don’t think I understand. Have you brought this gentleman here to
examine my conscience?”

“Name of a name! He’s prickly as a ------ porcupine!” Danton protested.

“No, no.” Le Chapelier was conciliatory, seeking to provide an antidote
to the irritant administered by his companion. “We require your help,
Andre. Danton here thinks that you are the very man for us. Listen
now...”

“That’s it. You tell him,” Danton agreed. “You both talk the same
mincing--sort of French. He’ll probably understand you.”

Le Chapelier went on without heeding the interruption. “This violation
by the King of the obvious rights of a country engaged in framing a
constitution that shall make it free has shattered every philanthropic
illusion we still cherished. There are those who go so far as to
proclaim the King the vowed enemy of France. But that, of course, is
excessive.”

“Who says so?” blazed Danton, and swore horribly by way of conveying his
total disagreement.

Le Chapelier waved him into silence, and proceeded.

“Anyhow, the matter has been more than enough, added to all the rest,
to set us by the ears again in the Assembly. It is open war between the
Third Estate and the Privileged.”

“Was it ever anything else?”

“Perhaps not; but it has assumed a new character. You’ll have heard of
the duel between Lameth and the Duc de Castries?”

“A trifling affair.”

“In its results. But it might have been far other. Mirabeau is
challenged and insulted now at every sitting. But he goes his way,
cold-bloodedly wise. Others are not so circumspect; they meet insult
with insult, blow with blow, and blood is being shed in private duels.
The thing is reduced by these swordsmen of the nobility to a system.”

Andre-Louis nodded. He was thinking of Philippe de Vilmorin. “Yes,” he
said, “it is an old trick of theirs. It is so simple and direct--like
themselves. I wonder only that they didn’t hit upon this system sooner.
In the early days of the States General, at Versailles, it might have
had a better effect. Now, it comes a little late.”

“But they mean to make up for lost time--sacred name!” cried Danton.
“Challenges are flying right and left between these bully-swordsmen,
these spadassinicides, and poor devils of the robe who have never learnt
to fence with anything but a quill. It’s just ------ murder. Yet if I were
to go amongst messieurs les nobles and crunch an addled head or two with
this stick of mine, snap a few aristocratic necks between these fingers
which the good God has given me for the purpose, the law would send
me to atone upon the gallows. This in a land that is striving after
liberty. Why, Dieu me damne! I am not even allowed to keep my hat on in
the theatre. But they ------ these ------s!”

“He is right,” said Le Chapelier. “The thing has become unendurable,
insufferable. Two days ago M. d’Ambly threatened Mirabeau with his
cane before the whole Assembly. Yesterday M. de Faussigny leapt up and
harangued his order by inviting murder. ‘Why don’t we fall on these
scoundrels, sword in hand?’ he asked. Those were his very words: ‘Why
don’t we fall on these scoundrels, sword in hand.’”

“It is so much simpler than lawmaking,” said Andre-Louis.

“Lagron, the deputy from Ancenis in the Loire, said something that
we did not hear in answer. As he was leaving the Manege one of these
bullies grossly insulted him. Lagron no more than used his elbow to push
past when the fellow cried out that he had been struck, and issued his
challenge. They fought this morning early in the Champs Elysees, and
Lagron was killed, run through the stomach deliberately by a man who
fought like a fencing-master, and poor Lagron did not even own a sword.
He had to borrow one to go to the assignation.”

Andre-Louis--his mind ever on Vilmorin, whose case was here repeated,
even to the details--was swept by a gust of passion. He clenched his
hands, and his jaws set. Danton’s little eyes observed him keenly.

“Well? And what do you think of that? Noblesse oblige, eh? The thing is
we must oblige them too, these ------s. We must pay them back in the
same coin; meet them with the same weapons. Abolish them; tumble these
assassinateurs into the abyss of nothingness by the same means.”

“But how?”

“How? Name of God! Haven’t I said it?”

“That is where we require your help,” Le Chapelier put in. “There must
be men of patriotic feeling among the more advanced of your pupils.
M. Danton’s idea is that a little band of these--say a half-dozen, with
yourself at their head--might read these bullies a sharp lesson.”

Andre-Louis frowned.

“And how, precisely, had M. Danton thought that this might be done?”

M. Danton spoke for himself, vehemently.

“Why, thus: We post you in the Manege, at the hour when the Assembly is
rising. We point out the six leading phlebotomists, and let you loose to
insult them before they have time to insult any of the representatives.
Then to-morrow morning, six ------ phlebotomists themselves phlebotomized
secundum artem. That will give the others something to think about. It
will give them a great deal to think about, by ----! If necessary the dose
may be repeated to ensure a cure. If you kill the ------s, so much the
better.”

He paused, his sallow face flushed with the enthusiasm of his idea.
Andre-Louis stared at him inscrutably.

“Well, what do you say to that?”

“That it is most ingenious.” And Andre-Louis turned aside to look out of
the window.

“And is that all you think of it?”

“I will not tell you what else I think of it because you probably would
not understand. For you, M. Danton, there is at least this excuse that
you did not know me. But you, Isaac--to bring this gentleman here with
such a proposal!”

Le Chapelier was overwhelmed in confusion. “I confess I hesitated,”
 he apologized. “But M. Danton would not take my word for it that the
proposal might not be to your taste.”

“I would not!” Danton broke in, bellowing. He swung upon Le Chapelier,
brandishing his great arms. “You told me monsieur was a patriot.
Patriotism knows no scruples. You call this mincing dancing-master a
patriot?”

“Would you, monsieur, out of patriotism consent to become an assassin?”

“Of course I would. Haven’t I told you so? Haven’t I told you that
I would gladly go among them with my club, and crack them like so
many--fleas?”

“Why not, then?”

“Why not? Because I should get myself hanged. Haven’t I said so?”

“But what of that ------ being a patriot? Why not, like another Curtius,
jump into the gulf, since you believe that your country would benefit by
your death?”

M. Danton showed signs of exasperation. “Because my country will benefit
more by my life.”

“Permit me, monsieur, to suffer from a similar vanity.”

“You? But where would be the danger to you? You would do your work under
the cloak of duelling--as they do.”

“Have you reflected, monsieur, that the law will hardly regard a
fencing-master who kills his opponent as an ordinary combatant,
particularly if it can be shown that the fencing-master himself provoked
the attack?”

“So! Name of a name!” M. Danton blew out his cheeks and delivered
himself with withering scorn. “It comes to this, then: you are afraid!”

“You may think so if you choose--that I am afraid to do slyly and
treacherously that which a thrasonical patriot like yourself is afraid
of doing frankly and openly. I have other reasons. But that one should
suffice you.”

Danton gasped. Then he swore more amazingly and variedly than ever.

“By ----! you are right,” he admitted, to Andre-Louis’ amazement. “You
are right, and I am wrong. I am as bad a patriot as you are, and I am
a coward as well.” And he invoked the whole Pantheon to witness his
self-denunciation. “Only, you see, I count for something: and if they
take me and hang me, why, there it is! Monsieur, we must find some other
way. Forgive the intrusion. Adieu!” He held out his enormous hand..

Le Chapelier stood hesitating, crestfallen.

“You understand, Andre? I am sorry that...”

“Say no more, please. Come and see me soon again. I would press you to
remain, but it is striking nine, and the first of my pupils is about to
arrive.”

“Nor would I permit it,” said Danton. “Between us we must resolve the
riddle of how to extinguish M. de La Tour d’Azyr and his friends.”

“Who?”

Sharp as a pistol-shot came that question, as Danton was turning away.
The tone of it brought him up short. He turned again, Le Chapelier with
him.

“I said M. de La Tour d’Azyr.”

“What has he to do with the proposal you were making me?”

“He? Why, he is the phlebotomist in chief.”

And Le Chapelier added. “It is he who killed Lagron.”

“Not a friend of yours, is he?” wondered Danton.

“And it is La Tour d’Azyr you desire me to kill?” asked Andre-Louis very
slowly, after the manner of one whose thoughts are meanwhile pondering
the subject.

“That’s it,” said Danton. “And not a job for a prentice hand, I can
assure you.”

“Ah, but this alters things,” said Andre-Louis, thinking aloud. “It
offers a great temptation.”

“Why, then...?” The Colossus took a step towards him again.

“Wait!” He put up his hand. Then with chin sunk on his breast, he paced
away to the window, musing.

Le Chapelier and Danton exchanged glances, then watched him, waiting,
what time he considered.

At first he almost wondered why he should not of his own accord have
decided upon some such course as this to settle that long-standing
account of M. de La Tour d’Azyr. What was the use of this great skill in
fence that he had come to acquire, unless he could turn it to account
to avenge Vilmorin, and to make Aline safe from the lure of her own
ambition? It would be an easy thing to seek out La Tour d’Azyr, put a
mortal affront upon him, and thus bring him to the point. To-day this
would be murder, murder as treacherous as that which La Tour d’Azyr
had done upon Philippe de Vilmorin; for to-day the old positions were
reversed, and it was Andre-Louis who might go to such an assignation
without a doubt of the issue. It was a moral obstacle of which he made
short work. But there remained the legal obstacle he had expounded to
Danton. There was still a law in France; the same law which he had
found it impossible to move against La Tour d’Azyr, but which would move
briskly enough against himself in like case. And then, suddenly, as if
by inspiration, he saw the way--a way which if adopted would probably
bring La Tour d’Azyr to a poetic justice, bring him, insolent,
confident, to thrust himself upon Andre-Louis’ sword, with all the odium
of provocation on his own side.

He turned to them again, and they saw that he was very pale, that his
great dark eyes glowed oddly.

“There will probably be some difficulty in finding a suppleant for this
poor Lagron,” he said. “Our fellow-countrymen will be none so eager to
offer themselves to the swords of Privilege.”

“True enough,” said Le Chapelier gloomily; and then, as if suddenly
leaping to the thing in Andre-Louis’ mind: “Andre!” he cried. “Would
you...”

“It is what I was considering. It would give me a legitimate place in
the Assembly. If your Tour d’Azyrs choose to seek me out then, why,
their blood be upon their own heads. I shall certainly do nothing to
discourage them.” He smiled curiously. “I am just a rascal who tries to
be honest--Scaramouche always, in fact; a creature of sophistries. Do you
think that Ancenis would have me for its representative?”

“Will it have Omnes Omnibus for its representative?” Le Chapelier was
laughing, his countenance eager. “Ancenis will be convulsed with pride.
It is not Rennes or Nantes, as it might have been had you wished it. But
it gives you a voice for Brittany.”

“I should have to go to Ancenis...”

“No need at all. A letter from me to the Municipality, and the
Municipality will confirm you at once. No need to move from here. In a
fortnight at most the thing can be accomplished. It is settled, then?”

Andre-Louis considered yet a moment. There was his academy. But he could
make arrangements with Le Duc and Galoche to carry it on for him
whilst himself directing and advising. Le Duc, after all, was become a
thoroughly efficient master, and he was a trustworthy fellow. At need a
third assistant could be engaged.

“Be it so,” he said at last.

Le Chapelier clasped hands with him and became congratulatorily voluble,
until interrupted by the red-coated giant at the door.

“What exactly does it mean to our business, anyway?” he asked. “Does it
mean that when you are a representative you will not scruple to skewer
M. le Marquis?”

“If M. le Marquis should offer himself to be skewered, as he no doubt
will.”

“I perceive the distinction,” said M. Danton, and sneered. “You’ve an
ingenious mind.” He turned to Le Chapelier. “What did you say he was to
begin with--a lawyer, wasn’t it?”

“Yes, I was a lawyer, and afterwards a mountebank.”

“And this is the result!”

“As you say. And do you know that we are after all not so dissimilar,
you and I?”

“What?”

“Once like you I went about inciting other people to go and kill the man
I wanted dead. You’ll say I was a coward, of course.”

Le Chapelier prepared to slip between them as the clouds gathered on
the giant’s brow. Then these were dispelled again, and the great laugh
vibrated through the long room.

“You’ve touched me for the second time, and in the same place. Oh,
you can fence, my lad. We should be friends. Rue des Cordeliers is my
address. Any--scoundrel will tell you where Danton lodges. Desmoulins
lives underneath. Come and visit us one evening. There’s always a bottle
for a friend.”