CHAPTER I.

THE PRISON-DOOR.

A crowd of bearded men in dark, gloomy clothes and gray, pointed hats, mixed with women, some wearing hoods and others bareheaded, gathered in front of a wooden building. The building's door was made of heavy oak timber and covered with iron spikes.

Whenever founders start a new colony, even if they plan a perfect society, they always have to set aside land for two things: a cemetery and a prison. Following this rule, the first settlers of Boston built their very first prison near Cornhill at about the same time that they created the first burial ground on Isaac Johnson's land. That grave later became the center of all the subsequent graves in the old churchyard of King's Chapel. It is certain that only fifteen or twenty years after the town was settled, the wooden jail was already stained by the weather. These stains and other signs of age made its dark, low-roofed front look even gloomier. The rust on the heavy ironwork of its oak door looked older than anything else in the New World. Like everything associated with crime, the prison seemed as if it had never been new.

There was a patch of grass in front of this ugly building, between it and the carriage tracks on the street. The grass was overgrown with burdock, pigweed, and other ugly weeds. These weeds seemed to thrive in the soil around the prison, which was like a dark flower in the middle of their new society. But a wild rosebush grew on one side of the entrance, rooted right at the threshold. In this month of June, it was covered with delicate blossoms. It seemed as if these flowers offered their sweet scent and fragile beauty to the prisoner going inside, or to the condemned criminal walking out to meet his doom. It was a sign that the deep heart of Nature could still feel pity and be kind to them.

By a strange chance, this rosebush has been preserved in history. We will not try to decide whether it had simply survived from the ancient forest long after the giant pines and oaks were chopped down. Or, as some stories say, perhaps it had sprouted from the ground beneath the feet of the sainted Anne Hutchinson as she walked through the prison door. Since we find it right at the threshold of our story, which is now about to begin from that gloomy door, we must pluck one of its flowers and present it to you. Let us hope it serves to represent some sweet moral lesson to be found along the way, or to bring some comfort to the dark end of this story of human weakness and sorrow.
