CHAPTER XIV.

HESTER AND THE PHYSICIAN.

Hester told little Pearl to run down to the water and play with the shells and seaweed while she talked to the herb gatherer. The child ran off like a bird, went barefoot, and walked along the wet shoreline. She stopped occasionally to look into tide pools, which served as mirrors. Pearl saw her own reflection with dark curls and a mischievous smile. Since she had no other playmates, she invited her reflection to hold hands and run a race. The imaginary girl in the pool seemed to beckon her to come in. Pearl stepped into the pool up to her shins and looked at her white feet at the bottom. The water rippled, making her reflection's smile seem to float back and forth.

Meanwhile, Hester walked up to the doctor.

“I want to speak with you,” she said. “It is about something important to both of us.”

“Aha! Does Mistress Hester have something to say to old Roger Chillingworth?” the doctor asked, standing up. “I would be glad to listen. I have heard good news about you. Just yesterday, a magistrate told me that the council has been discussing your situation. They debated whether they could safely allow you to take the scarlet letter off your chest. I urged the magistrate to let them do it immediately.”

“The magistrates do not have the power to take off this badge,” Hester replied calmly. “If I were worthy to be free of it, it would fall off on its own, or it would change into something else.”

“Well, wear it if you prefer,” he said. “A woman must follow her own taste when dressing. The letter is beautifully embroidered and looks very bright on your chest.”

Hester stared at the old man. She was shocked to see how much he had changed over the last seven years. He had grown older, but he still seemed strong and alert. The change was in his expression. The calm, studious look she remembered had completely disappeared. Now, his eyes had an eager, fierce, and secretive glare. He tried to hide this look with a smile, but the smile looked mocking and made his dark expression even more obvious. Occasionally, a red light seemed to flash in his eyes, as if a fire were smoldering in his chest and flared up with anger. He would quickly hide this flash and try to look calm again.

Roger Chillingworth was a clear example of how a person can turn into a devil by doing a devil's work. He had transformed himself by spending seven years analyzing a tortured heart. He enjoyed watching that suffering, and he constantly fed the flames of the minister's pain.

The scarlet letter burned on Hester's chest. She realized she was partly responsible for the ruin of this man's life as well.

“Why do you look at my face so closely?” the doctor asked.

“I see something that would make me cry if I had any tears left,” Hester answered. “But let that go. I want to talk about the minister.”

“What about him?” Roger Chillingworth asked eagerly. He was glad to discuss the subject with the only person who knew his secret. “Actually, I was just thinking about him. Speak freely, and I will answer.”

“When we last spoke seven years ago,” Hester said, “you made me promise to keep your identity a secret. The minister's life and reputation were in your hands, so I felt I had to agree. But I felt guilty because I owed a duty to him. I felt like I was betraying him by keeping your secret. Since then, you have stayed closer to him than anyone else. You follow him everywhere. You are with him when he sleeps and when he wakes. You search his thoughts and torture his heart. You have a hold on his life, causing him to suffer every single day, yet he does not know who you really are. By allowing this, I have been false to the only man I should have protected.”

“What other choice did you have?” Roger Chillingworth asked. “If I had pointed my finger at him, he would have been thrown from his pulpit into a dungeon, or even hanged.”

“It would have been better for him to die then,” Hester said.

“What harm have I done to him?” Chillingworth asked. “No king could have bought the medical care I have given to this miserable priest. Without my help, he would have died from his own guilt within two years of your shared sin. His spirit was not strong enough to bear a burden like your scarlet letter. I could tell you secrets about him, but I will not. I have used all my medical skill to keep him alive. He only breathes today because of me.”

“It would be better if he had died,” Hester repeated.

“You are right,” Chillingworth cried, letting his anger show. “He should have died at once. No man has ever suffered like this minister, and he has suffered right in front of his worst enemy. He has felt a constant evil influence on his life, like a curse. He knew that no friend was watching over him, and that someone was looking into his soul to find evil. But he did not know that person was me. Because he is a minister, he believed he was being tortured by a demon with bad dreams and despair. In reality, it was just my constant presence. I have wronged him, and he has wronged me. I have grown to live only for this revenge. A normal man has turned into a demon to torture him.”

As the doctor spoke, he raised his hands in horror. He looked as if he saw a terrifying monster in a mirror instead of his own face. It was a rare moment when he finally saw his own true moral character. He had probably never looked at himself this way before.

“Haven't you tortured him enough?” Hester asked, seeing his expression. “Has he not paid you back yet?”

“No, he has only increased his debt,” the doctor replied, his anger turning into a dark mood. “Do you remember me as I was nine years ago, Hester? I was already middle-aged, but my life was quiet and peaceful. I spent my time studying to gain knowledge and to help other people. I lived an innocent life and helped many. Do you remember? I was quiet and calm, but I was also kind, true, just, and loving. Was I not like that?”

“You were all that and more,” Hester agreed.

“And what am I now?” he asked, showing all the evil on his face. “I have told you. I am a demon. Who made me this way?”

“I did,” Hester said, shivering. “It was my fault as well as his. Why didn't you seek revenge on me instead?”

“I left you to the scarlet letter,” Chillingworth said, pointing to the badge with a smile. “If that has not punished you, I cannot do any more.”

“It has punished me,” Hester replied.

“I thought so,” the doctor said. “Now, what do you want from me regarding the minister?”

“I must tell him the truth,” Hester said firmly. “He must know who you really are. I do not know what will happen, but I must pay my debt of truth to him. His reputation, his career, and his life are in your hands. The scarlet letter has taught me to tell the truth, even if it is painful. I see no benefit in him living such a miserable, empty life, so I will not beg for your mercy. Do what you want with him. There is no happiness left for him, for me, for you, or for little Pearl. We are all lost in this dark maze.”

“Woman, I almost pity you,” Chillingworth said, admiring her strength and despair. “You have great qualities. If you had met a better love than mine when you were young, this evil might not have happened. I pity you for the good that has been wasted in your life.”

“And I pity you,” Hester answered, “because hatred has turned a wise and good man into a demon. Can you free yourself from this hate and become human again? If not for his sake, then do it for your own. Forgive him, and leave his punishment to God. I said earlier that we are all lost in this maze of guilt. But you still have a chance for good, because you were wronged and you have the power to forgive. Will you reject that chance?”

“Be quiet, Hester,” the old man said sternly. “It is not in my power to forgive. We have no choice in what we do. Your first sin planted the seed of evil, and everything since then has been a dark necessity. We are all just following our fate. Let the black flower grow as it must. Now go, and deal with the minister however you choose.”

He waved his hand and went back to gathering herbs.
