[Chapter 7]
There is no reason for you to say, as you always do, that this kind of wise man does not exist anywhere. We are not making him up as some unrealistic glory of the human race or imagining a huge, false illusion. We have shown him, and we will continue to show him exactly as we describe him. Because anything truly great that goes beyond the ordinary is rare, he might be uncommon and only appear every once in a while. But I think this very Marcus Cato, the man who started our discussion, might have even been greater than our model.

Also, whatever gives an injury must be stronger than whatever receives the injury. Wickedness is not stronger than virtue, so the wise man cannot be injured. Only bad people try to injure good people. Good people live peacefully with each other, but bad people are destructive not only to good people but also to each other. If a person cannot be injured by someone weaker than themselves, and a bad person is weaker than a good person, then a good person does not need to fear being injured by someone different from themselves. Therefore, no injury can ever have any effect on the wise man. I probably do not even need to remind you that only the wise man is truly good.

Our opponents might argue that if Socrates was unfairly found guilty, then he received an injury.

At this point, we need to remember that even if someone tries to injure me, I might not actually receive that injury. For example, if someone steals something from my country house and puts it in my city house, he committed a theft, but I did not actually lose anything. A person can act with evil intentions without doing any real harm. If a man sleeps with his own wife thinking she is a stranger, he commits a sin in his mind, but his wife does not. If someone gives me poison, but the poison loses its power when mixed with my food, the person who gave the poison is still a criminal even though he did no harm. Just because a robber's sword gets caught in his victim's clothes and misses the target does not mean he is no longer a robber. When it comes to guilt, every crime is complete the moment the intention is put into action, even before the act is finished.

Some crimes are built in a way that the first step can happen without the second step, even though the second step cannot happen without the first. Let me explain. I can move my feet without running, but I cannot run without moving my feet. I can be in the water without swimming, but if I swim, I must be in the water. Our topic works exactly like this. If I received an injury, someone must have given it to me. But just because an injury was aimed at me does not mean I must receive it. Many things can get in the way to stop the injury. For example, pure chance might knock away the hand that aims at us, or a thrown arrow might miss the target. In the same way, all kinds of injuries can be deflected or blocked by circumstances on their way. This means they can be "given" but never "received."
