[Chapter 3]
I can almost see your anger boiling over. You are probably getting ready to say, "These are exactly the kinds of claims that make it hard to take Stoic philosophy seriously. You promise huge things that I wouldn't even dare to believe, let alone hope for. Then, after speaking so bravely, you admit that although the wise man is not 'poor,' he might often lack servants, a house, or food. You say the wise man is never 'crazy,' but you do not deny that he might sometimes lose his mind, talk nonsense, and act wild because of the pain of an illness. You claim the wise man can never be a 'slave,' but you admit that he might be sold and forced to do low-level tasks according to a master's orders. In the end, despite all your proud claims, you fall back to the exact same level as everyone else. You are just calling the same things by different names!

"Because of this, I suspect there is a trick hidden behind this beautiful and noble rule that 'a wise man can be neither injured nor insulted.' There is a huge difference between saying a wise man does not feel anger and saying he is immune to injuries. If you mean that the wise man simply bears injuries calmly, then he has no special ability. He has merely developed patience, which is a very common trait that anyone can learn if they go through enough hardships. But if you claim that a wise man can never be injured—meaning no one will even dare to try to harm him—then I will stop everything I am doing right now and become a Stoic philosopher."

My goal is not to dress the wise man in fake titles, but to raise him to a high place where no injury can reach him. You might think that no one will even try to mock or bother the wise man. But of course there will be such attempts. Nothing in this world is holy enough to be completely safe from disrespect. However, just because someone tries to attack something holy does not make it any less holy. There are actually people who try to bring down beings much greater than themselves, even when they know perfectly well they cannot do any real harm.

Something that is truly invulnerable is not something that never gets attacked, but something that never gets hurt even when it is attacked. This is exactly how I view the wise man. There is no doubt that strength that remains unbroken in fierce battles is much more reliable than strength that has never been tested in a fight. Untested strength cannot be trusted, but a solid defense that blocks every attack deserves to be recognized as the surest ability.

In the same way, you must realize that a wise man who is immune to injury is on a much higher level than a wise man who never gets attacked in the first place. I call a person brave when war cannot break him and enemy violence cannot scare him. I do not call him brave just because he lives a luxurious and comfortable life among lazy people. Therefore, I say that the wise man is immune to all injuries. It does not matter how many arrows are shot at him. None of those arrows can pierce him.

Think of hard stones that cannot be cut even with steel. A diamond does not break or wear down. Instead, it blunts all the tools that try to cut it. Think of materials that do not burn away in a fire, but actually keep their shape and hardness inside the flames. Think of tall and solid cliffs that stand firm, breaking the crashing waves over centuries. The mind of the wise man is exactly just as firm. His mind has gathered so much powerful strength that it is perfectly safe from all injuries, just like the things I just mentioned.
