[Chapter 17]

Chrysippus tells a story about a man who flew into a rage because someone called him a "sea-sheep." We also saw Fidus Cornelius, the son-in-law of Ovid, crying in the Senate house because Corbulo called him a "plucked ostrich." His composure never failed him when faced with other insults that attacked his character and his lifestyle, but at this ridiculous comment, he burst into tears. This shows how pathetic and weak human minds can be when reason no longer guides them.

We should not take offense when someone imitates how we talk, how we walk, our physical defects, or our pronunciation. If we actually have those traits, they do not become more noticeable just because someone else mimics them.

Some people cannot stand to hear about their old age and gray hairs, even though that is exactly what everyone prays to achieve. The reproach of poverty agonizes some men, but whoever tries to hide it is just making it a reproach to himself. If you are the first to voluntarily acknowledge your situation, you completely cut the ground out from under the people who want to sneer and politely insult you. No one gets laughed at if they begin by laughing at themselves.

Tradition tells us that Vatinius, a man who seemed born to be hated and mocked, was actually a witty and clever joker. He made many jokes about his own ugly feet and short neck. By doing this, he dodged the insults of Cicero and his many other enemies. He had more enemies than he had diseases. If a man who only learned to ignore insults through sheer brazenness could do this, then someone who has studied philosophy and refined their character can certainly do the same.

Besides, it is a kind of revenge to ruin a person's enjoyment of the insult they just tried to give you. They will walk away thinking, "Well, I guess he did not understand the joke." The success of an insult relies entirely on how sensitive and angry the victim gets. Eventually, the person throwing the insult will meet their match, and someone else will come along and get revenge for you.
