Because very few records of Sun Tzu's life survived, this single story—demonstrating his military discipline by drilling the King's palace women—is the definitive biographical text traditionally included in editions of The Art of War.

Sun Tzu Wu was from the Qi State. His Art of War brought him to the attention of King Ho Lu of Wu.

Ho Lu said to him: "I have carefully read your 13 chapters. May I submit your theory of managing troops to a small test?"

Sun Tzu replied: "You may."

The King asked: "Can the test be applied to women?"

Sun Tzu said: "Yes."

Arrangements were made to bring 180 women out of the palace. Sun Tzu divided them into two companies and placed one of the King's favorite women at the head of each. He then ordered them all to take spears in their hands and addressed them: "I presume you know the difference between front and back, right and left?"

The women replied: "Yes."

Sun Tzu continued: "When I say 'Eyes Front', you must look straight ahead. When I say 'Left Turn', you must face left. When I say 'Right Turn', you must face right. When I say 'About Face', you must turn all the way around."

After explaining the commands, he set up the halberds and battle-axes to begin the drill. Then, to the sound of drums, he gave the order: "Right Turn." But the women only burst out laughing.

Sun Tzu said: "If words of command are not clear and distinct, if orders are not thoroughly understood, then the general is to blame."

So he started drilling them again, and this time gave the order: "Left Turn." The women once more burst into laughter.

Sun Tzu said: "If words of command are not clear and distinct, if orders are not thoroughly understood, the general is to blame. But if his orders are clear, and the soldiers still disobey, then it is the fault of their officers."

Saying this, he ordered the leaders of the two companies to be executed.

The King of Wu was watching the scene from a raised pavilion. When he saw that his favorite women were about to be executed, he was greatly alarmed and immediately sent down a messenger with this message: "We are now quite satisfied with our general's ability to handle troops. If we lose these two women, our food and drink will lose their taste. It is our wish that they not be executed."

Sun Tzu replied: "Having already received His Majesty's commission to be the general of his forces, there are certain commands of His Majesty that, acting in that capacity, I am unable to accept."

Accordingly, he had the two leaders executed, and immediately installed the next two women in line as leaders in their place.

When this was done, the drum sounded for the drill once more. The women went through all the movements—turning right or left, marching ahead or wheeling back, kneeling or standing—with perfect accuracy and precision, not daring to make a sound.

Then Sun Tzu sent a messenger to the King, saying: "Your soldiers, Sire, are now properly drilled and disciplined, and ready for your Majesty's inspection. They can be put to any use their sovereign may desire. Order them to go through fire and water, and they will not disobey."

But the King replied: "Let our general stop drilling and return to camp. We have no desire to come down and inspect them."

Thereupon Sun Tzu said: "The King is only fond of words, and cannot translate them into deeds."

After that, Ho Lu saw that Sun Tzu knew how to handle an army, and finally appointed him general. In the West, he defeated the Chu State and forced his way into Ying, the capital. To the North, he put Qi and Jin in fear, and spread his fame among the rival princes. And Sun Tzu's name shared in the glory of the state.
