X. Suppose, however, that your life has become full of trouble, and
that without knowing what you were doing you have fallen into some
snare which either public or private Fortune has set for you, and
that you can neither untie it nor break it: then remember that
fettered men suffer much at first from the burdens and clogs upon
their legs: afterwards, when they have made up their minds not to
fret themselves about them, but to endure them, necessity teaches
them to bear them bravely, and habit to bear them easily. In every
station of life you will find amusements, relaxations, and enjoyments;
that is, provided you be willing to make light of evils rather than
to hate them. Knowing to what sorrows we were born, there is nothing
for which Nature more deserves our thanks than for having invented
habit as an alleviation of misfortune, which soon accustoms us to
the severest evils. No one could hold out against misfortune if it
permanently exercised the same force as at its first onset. We are
all chained to Fortune: some men’s chain is loose and made of gold,
that of others is tight and of meaner metal: but what difference
does this make? we are all included in the same captivity, and even
those who have bound us are bound themselves, unless you think that
a chain on the left side is lighter to bear: one man may be bound
by public {272} office, another by wealth: some have to bear the
weight of illustrious, some of humble birth: some are subject to
the commands of others, some only to their own: some are kept in
one place by being banished thither, others by being elected to the
priesthood. All life is slavery: let each man therefore reconcile
himself to his lot, complain of it as little as possible, and lay
hold of whatever good lies within his reach. No condition can be
so wretched that an impartial mind can find no compensations in it.
Small sites, if ingeniously divided, may be made use of for many
different purposes, and arrangement will render ever so narrow a
room habitable. Call good sense to your aid against difficulties:
it is possible to soften what is harsh, to widen what is too narrow,
and to make heavy burdens press less severely upon one who bears
them skilfully. Moreover, we ought not to allow our desires to
wander far afield, but we must make them confine themselves to our
immediate neighbourhood, since they will not endure to be altogether
locked up. We must leave alone things which either cannot come to
pass or can only be effected with difficulty, and follow after such
things as are near at hand and within reach of our hopes, always
remembering that all things are equally unimportant, and that though
they have a different outward appearance, they are all alike empty
within. Neither let us envy those who are in high places: the heights
which look lofty to us are steep and rugged. Again, those whom
unkind fate has placed in critical situations will be safer if they
show as little pride in their proud position as may be, and do all
they are able to bring down their fortunes to the level of other
men’s. There are many who must needs cling to their high pinnacle
of power, because they cannot descend from it save by falling
headlong: yet they assure us that their greatest burden is being
obliged to be burdensome to others, and that they are nailed to
their lofty post rather than raised to it: let {273} them then, by
dispensing justice, clemency, and kindness with an open and liberal
hand, provide themselves with assistance to break their fall, and
looking forward to this maintain their position more hopefully. Yet
nothing sets us free from these alternations of hope and fear so
well as always fixing some limit to our successes, and not allowing
Fortune to choose when to stop our career, but to halt of our own
accord long before we apparently need do so. By acting thus certain
desires will rouse up our spirits, and yet being confined within
bounds, will not lead us to embark on vast and vague enterprises.