XV. Yet we gain nothing by getting rid of all personal causes of
sadness, for sometimes we are possessed by hatred of the human race.
When you reflect how rare simplicity is, how unknown innocence, how
seldom faith is kept, unless it be to our advantage, when you
remember such numbers of successful crimes, so many equally hateful
losses and gains of lust, and ambition so impatient even of its own
natural limits that it is willing to purchase distinction by baseness,
the mind seems as it were cast into darkness, and shadows rise
before it as though the virtues were all overthrown and we were no
longer allowed to hope to possess them or benefited by their
possession. We ought therefore to bring ourselves into such a state
of mind that all the vices of the vulgar may not appear hateful to
us, but merely ridiculous, and we should imitate Democritus rather
than Heraclitus. The latter of these, whenever be {282} appeared
in public, used to weep, the former to laugh: the one thought all
human doings to be follies, the other thought them to be miseries.
We must take a higher view of all things, and bear with them more
easily: it better becomes a man to scoff at life than to lament
over it. Add to this that he who laughs at the human race deserves
better of it than he who mourns for it, for the former leaves it
some good hopes of improvement, while the latter stupidly weeps
over what he has given up all hopes of mending. He who after surveying
the universe cannot control his laughter shows, too, a greater mind
than he who cannot restrain his tears, because his mind is only
affected in the slightest possible degree, and he does not think
that any part of all this apparatus is either important, or serious,
or unhappy. As for the several causes which render us happy or
sorrowful, let every one describe them for himself, and learn the
truth of Bion’s saying, “That all the doings of men were very like
what he began with, and that there is nothing in their lives which
is more holy or decent than their conception.” Yet it is better to
accept public morals and human vices calmly without bursting into
either laughter or tears; for to be hurt by the sufferings of others
is to be for ever miserable, while to enjoy the sufferings of others
is an inhuman pleasure, just as it is a useless piece of humanity
to weep and pull a long face because some one is burying his son.
In one’s own misfortunes, also, one ought so to conduct oneself as
to bestow upon them just as much sorrow as reason, not as much as
custom requires: for many shed tears in order to show them, and
whenever no one is looking at them their eyes are dry, but they
think it disgraceful not to weep when every one does so. So deeply
has this evil of being guided by the opinion of others taken root
in us, that even grief, the simplest of all emotions, begins to be
counterfeited.

{283}