IX. We shall be pleased with this measure of wealth if we have
previously taken pleasure in thrift, without which no riches are
sufficient, and with which none are insufficient, especially as the
remedy is always at hand, and poverty itself by calling in the aid
of thrift can convert itself into riches. Let us accustom ourselves
to set aside mere outward show, and to measure things by their uses,
not by their ornamental trappings: let our hunger be tamed by food,
our thirst quenched by drinking, our lust confined within needful
bounds; let us learn to use our limbs, and to arrange our dress and
way of life according to what was approved of by our ancestors, not
in imitation of new-fangled models: let us learn to increase our
continence, to repress luxury, to set bounds to our pride, to assuage
our anger, to look upon poverty without prejudice, to practise
thrift, albeit many are ashamed to do so, to apply cheap remedies
to the wants of nature, to keep all undisciplined hopes and aspirations
as it were under lock and key, and to make it our business to get
our riches from ourselves and not from Fortune. We never can so
thoroughly defeat the vast diversity and malignity of misfortune
with which we are threatened as not to feel the weight of many gusts
if we offer a large spread of canvas to the wind: we must draw our
affairs into a small compass, to make the darts of Fortune of no
avail. For this reason, sometimes slight mishaps have turned into
remedies, and more serious disorders have been healed by slighter
ones. When the mind pays no attention to good advice, and cannot
be brought to its senses by milder measures, why should we not think
that its interests are being served by poverty, disgrace, or financial
ruin being applied to it? one evil is balanced by another. Let us
then teach ourselves to be able to {270} dine without all Rome to
look on, to be the slaves of fewer slaves, to get clothes which
fulfil their original purpose, and to live in a smaller house. The
inner curve is the one to take, not only in running races and in
the contests of the circus, but also in the race of life; even
literary pursuits, the most becoming thing for a gentleman to spend
money upon, are only justifiable as long as they are kept within
bounds. What is the use of possessing numberless books and libraries,
whose titles their owner can hardly read through in a lifetime? A
student is overwhelmed by such a mass, not instructed, and it is
much better to devote yourself to a few writers than to skim through
many. Forty thousand books were burned at Alexandria: some would
have praised this library as a most noble memorial of royal wealth,
like Titus Livius, who says that it was “a splendid result of the
taste and attentive care of the kings.”[5] It had nothing to do
with taste or care, but was a piece of learned luxury, nay, not
even learned, since they amassed it, not for the sake of learning,
but to make a show, like many men who know less about letters than
a slave is expected to know, and who uses his books not to help him
in his studies but to ornament his dining-room. Let a man, then,
obtain as many books as he wants, but none for show. “It is more
respectable,” say you, “to spend one’s money on such books than on
vases of Corinthian brass and paintings.” Not so: everything that
is carried to excess is wrong. What excuses can you find for a man
who is eager to buy bookcases of ivory and citrus wood, to collect
the works of unknown or discredited authors, and who sits yawning
{271} amid so many thousands of books, whose backs and titles please
him more than any other part of them? Thus in the houses of the
laziest of men you will see the works of all the orators and
historians stacked upon book-shelves reaching right up to the
ceiling. At the present day a library has become as necessary an
appendage to a house as a hot and cold bath. I would excuse them
straightway if they really were carried away by an excessive zeal
for literature; but as it is, these costly works of sacred genius,
with all the illustrations that adorn them, are merely bought for
display and to serve as wall-furniture.