VII. In all cases one should be careful in one’s choice of men, and
see whether they be worthy of our bestowing a part of our life upon
them, or whether we shall waste our own time and theirs also: for
some even consider us to be in their debt because of our services
to them. Athenodorus said that “he would not so much as dine with
a man who would not be grateful to him for doing so”: meaning, I
imagine, that much less would he go to dinner with those who
recompense the services of their friends by their table, and regard
courses of dishes as donatives, as if they overate themselves to
do honour to others. Take away from these men their witnesses and
spectators: they will take no pleasure in solitary gluttony. You
must decide whether your disposition is better suited for vigorous
action or for tranquil speculation and contemplation, and you must
adopt whichever the bent of your genius inclines you for. Isocrates
laid hands upon Ephorus and led him away from the forum, thinking
that he would be more usefully employed in compiling chronicles;
for no good is done by forcing one’s mind to engage in uncongenial
work: it is vain to struggle against Nature. Yet nothing delights
the mind so much as faithful and pleasant friendship: what a {266}
blessing it is when there is one whose breast is ready to receive
all your secrets with safety, whose knowledge of your actions you
fear less than your own conscience, whose conversation removes your
anxieties, whose advice assists your plans, whose cheerfulness
dispels your gloom, whose very sight delights you! We should choose
for our friends men who are, as far as possible, free from strong
desires: for vices are contagious, and pass from a man to his
neighbour, and injure those who touch them. As, therefore, in times
of pestilence we have to be careful not to sit near people who are
infected and in whom the disease is raging, because by so doing,
we shall run into danger and catch the plague from their very breath;
so, too, in choosing our friends’ dispositions, we must take care
to select those who are as far as may be unspotted by the world;
for the way to breed disease is to mix what is sound with what is
rotten. Yet I do not advise you to follow after or draw to yourself
no one except a wise man: for where will you find him whom for so
many centuries we have sought in vain? in the place of the best
possible man take him who is least bad. You would hardly find any
time that would have enabled you to make a happier choice than if
you could have sought for a good man from among the Platos and
Xenophons and the rest of the produce of the brood of Socrates, or
if you had been permitted to choose one from the age of Cato: an
age which bore many men worthy to be born in Cato’s time (just as
it also bore many men worse than were ever known before, planners
of the blackest crimes: for it needed both classes in order to make
Cato understood: it wanted both good men, that he might win their
approbation, and bad men, against whom he could prove his strength):
but at the present day, when there is such a dearth of good men,
you must be less squeamish in your choice. Above all, however, avoid
dismal men who grumble at whatever happens, and find something to
complain {267} of in everything. Though he may continue loyal and
friendly towards you, still one’s peace of mind is destroyed by a
comrade whose mind is soured and who meets every incident with a
groan.