XVII. It also proves a fertile source of troubles if you take pains
to conceal your feelings and never show yourself to any one
undisguised, but, as many men do, live an artificial life, in order
to impose upon others: for the constant watching of himself becomes
a torment to a man, and he dreads being caught doing something at
variance with his usual habits, and, indeed, we never can be at our
ease if we imagine that every one who looks at us is weighing our
real value: for many things occur which strip people of their
disguise, however reluctantly they may part with it, and even if
all this trouble about oneself is successful, still life is neither
happy nor safe when one always has to wear a mask. But what pleasure
there is in that honest straight-forwardness which is its own
ornament, and which conceals no part of its character? Yet even
this life, which hides nothing from any one runs some risk of being
despised; for there are people who disdain whatever they come close
to: but there is no danger of virtue’s becoming contemptible when
she is brought near our eyes, and it is better to be scorned for
one’s simplicity than to bear the burden of unceasing hypocrisy.
Still, we must observe moderation in this matter, for there is a
great difference between living simply and living slovenly. Moreover,
we ought to retire a great deal into ourselves: for association
with persons unlike ourselves upsets all that we had arranged,
rouses the passions which were at rest, and rubs into a sore any
weak or imperfectly healed place in our minds. Nevertheless we ought
to mix up these two things, and to pass our lives alternately in
solitude and among throngs of people; for the former will make us
long for the society of mankind, the latter for that of ourselves,
and the one will counteract the other: solitude will cure us when
we are sick of crowds, and crowds will cure us when we are sick of
solitude. Neither ought we always to keep the mind strained to the
{285} same pitch, but it ought sometimes to be relaxed by amusement.
Socrates did not blush to play with little boys, Cato used to refresh
his mind with wine after he had wearied it with application to
affairs of state, and Scipio would move his triumphal and soldierly
limbs to the sound of music, not with a feeble and halting gait,
as is the fashion now-a-days, when we sway in our very walk with
more than womanly weakness, but dancing as men were wont in the
days of old on sportive and festal occasions, with manly bounds,
thinking it no harm to be seen so doing even by their enemies. Men’s
minds ought to have relaxation: they rise up better and more vigorous
after rest. We must not force crops from rich fields, for an unbroken
course of heavy crops will soon exhaust their fertility, and so
also the liveliness of our minds will be destroyed by unceasing
labour, but they will recover their strength after a short period
of rest and relief: for continuous toil produces a sort of numbness
and sluggishness. Men would not be so eager for this, if play and
amusement did not possess natural attractions for them, although
constant indulgence in them takes away all gravity and all strength
from the mind: for sleep, also, is necessary for our refreshment,
yet if you prolong it for days and nights together it will become
death. There is a great difference between slackening your hold of
a thing and letting it go. The founders of our laws appointed
festivals, in order that men might be publicly encouraged to be
cheerful, and they thought it necessary to vary our labours with
amusements, and, as I said before, some great men have been wont
to give themselves a certain number of holidays in every month, and
some divided every day into play-time and work-time. Thus, I remember
that great orator Asinius Pollio would not attend to any business
after the tenth hour: he would not even read letters after that
time for fear some new {286} trouble should arise, but in those two
hours[10] used to get rid of the weariness which he had contracted
during the whole day. Some rest in the middle of the day, and reserve
some light occupation for the afternoon. Our ancestors, too, forbade
any new motion to be made in the Senate after the tenth hour.
Soldiers divide their watches, and those who have just returned
from active service are allowed to sleep the whole night undisturbed.
We must humour our minds and grant them rest from time to time,
which acts upon them like food, and restores their strength. It
does good also to take walks out of doors, that our spirits may be
raised and refreshed by the open air and fresh breeze: sometimes
we gain strength by driving in a carriage, by travel, by change of
air, or by social meals and a more generous allowance of wine: at
times we ought to drink even to intoxication, not so as to drown,
but merely to dip ourselves in wine: for wine washes away troubles
and dislodges them from the depths of the mind, and acts as a remedy
to sorrow as it does to some diseases. The inventor of wine is
called Liber, not from the licence which he gives to our tongues,
but because he liberates the mind from the bondage of cares, and
emancipates it, animates it, and renders it more daring in all that
it attempts. Yet moderation is wholesome both in freedom and in
wine. It is believed that Solon and Arcesilaus used to drink deep.
Cato is reproached with drunkenness: but whoever casts this in his
teeth will find it easier to turn his reproach into a commendation
than to prove that Cato did anything wrong: however, we ought not
to do it often, for fear the mind should contract evil habits,
though it ought sometimes to be forced into frolic and frankness,
and to cast off dull sobriety for a while. If we believe the Greek
poet, “it is sometimes pleasant to be mad”; again, Plato always
{287} knocked in vain at the door of poetry when he was sober; or,
if we trust Aristotle, no great genius has ever been without a touch
of insanity. The mind cannot use lofty language, above that of the
common herd, unless it be excited. When it has spurned aside the
commonplace environments of custom, and rises sublime, instinct
with sacred fire, then alone can it chant a song too grand for
mortal lips: as long as it continues to dwell within itself it
cannot rise to any pitch of splendour: it must break away from the
beaten track, and lash itself to frenzy, till it gnaws the curb and
rushes away bearing up its rider to heights whither it would fear
to climb when alone.

I have now, my beloved Serenus, given you an account of what things
can preserve peace of mind, what things can restore it to us, what
can arrest the vices which secretly undermine it: yet be assured,
that none of these is strong enough to enable us to retain so
fleeting a blessing, unless we watch over our vacillating mind with
intense and unremitting care.


[1] Cf. Juv. ii. 150.

[2] The chief magistrate of the Greeks.

[3] The chief magistrate of the Oscans.

[4] The chief magistrate of the Carthaginians.

[5] “Livy himself styled the Alexandrian library _elegantiae regum
curaeque egregium opus_: a liberal encomium, for which he is pertly
criticised by the narrow stoicism of Seneca (Tranq., ch. ix.), whose
wisdom, on this occasion, deviates into nonsense.”—Gibbon, “Decline
and Fall,” ch. li, note.

[6] Haase reads _Ptolemaeus_.

[7] Caligula.

[8] It was the duty of the executioner to fasten a hook to the neck
of condemned criminals, by which they were dragged to the Tiber.

[9] Caligula.

[10] The Romans reckoned twelve hours from sunrise to sunset. These
“two hours” were therefore the two last of the day.




{288}

THE TENTH BOOK OF THE DIALOGUES OF L. ANNAEUS SENECA, ADDRESSED TO
PAULINUS.[1]