Chapter 12

Next, we must be careful not to work for something worthless or to work in vain. In other words, we should not desire what we cannot get. Also, we shouldn't finally get what we want after too much hard work, only to realize too late how foolish our desire was. This means our hard work should not be without results, and the result should not be so worthless that it doesn't match our effort. Usually, sadness comes from one of these two things: failing to succeed, or being ashamed of what we have succeeded in doing.

We must stop the back-and-forth running around that most people do as they wander through houses, theaters, and markets. They stick their noses into other people's business and always seem like they have something to do. If you ask one of them where they are going as they step out their door, they will answer, "I'm not sure, but I'm going to see some people and do something." They wander around with no purpose looking for things to do. They don't do what they planned to do; they just do whatever accidentally falls in their path. They move around uselessly and with no plan, just like ants crawling on a bush. They climb to the very top and then back down to the bottom without getting anything out of it.

Many people spend their lives in this exact same way, which could be called a state of "restless laziness." You would feel sorry for some of them if you saw them running as if their houses were on fire. They bump into everyone they meet and make themselves and others rush along with them. And yet, all this time they are just going to say hello to someone who won't even greet them back, or to attend the funeral of someone they didn't even know. They are on their way to hear the court ruling of someone who goes to law all the time, or to see the wedding of someone who gets married often. They will follow someone's carriage, and in some places, they will even carry it themselves. Later, they return home exhausted from doing nothing, swearing that even they don't know why they went out or where they were. And the very next day, they will wander through the exact same routine all over again.

Therefore, everything you do should have a purpose, and you should always keep a goal in mind. These restless people are not made restless by hard work; their minds are driven by mistaken ideas. Even they don't start moving without some kind of hope. They get excited by the outward appearance of things, and their crazy minds can't see how empty it is. In the same way, everyone who goes out to add to the crowd in the streets is being led around the city by worthless and empty reasons. Dawn pushes him out of the house even though he has nothing to do. After he pushes his way into many people's doors, greets their slaves or guards one by one, and gets turned away by many others, he finally realizes that the hardest person to find at home is himself. From this bad habit comes the worst of all bad habits: gossiping, digging into public and private secrets, and knowing many things that are not safe to talk about or listen to.
