Book 6

The Meeting Between Nausicaa and Odysseus

Odysseus was deep in sleep, exhausted by his journey and weariness. Meanwhile, Athena headed for the land and city of the Phaeacians. The Phaeacians once lived in the beautiful city of Hypereia, near the lawless Cyclopes. The Cyclopes were stronger and constantly raided them. So, their king, Nausithous, moved his people far away to Scheria, settling them far from all other nations. He built walls around the city, constructed houses and temples, and divided the land among his people. But King Nausithous had passed away and gone to the underworld. Now, King Alcinous, blessed with divine wisdom, ruled the land. Athena hurried to King Alcinous's house to help Odysseus return home.

Athena went straight to a beautifully decorated bedroom. There, Princess Nausicaa, King Alcinous's daughter, slept, as lovely as a goddess. Two pretty maidservants slept nearby, one on each side of the well-made folding doors. Athena transformed herself into the daughter of the famous sea captain Dymas. This girl was Nausicaa's closest friend and her exact age. Athena drifted to the girl's bedside like a whisper of wind, hovered over her head, and spoke.

<others>"Nausicaa, how can your mother let you be so lazy? Your clothes are all scattered about. And you're going to be married very soon! You need to dress well yourself, and also get nice clothes for your maidservants. That's how you'll earn a good reputation and make your parents proud. So, let's make tomorrow laundry day and start early at dawn. I'll come and help you, so everything can be ready as quickly as possible. All the finest young men in your land are courting you, so you won't be a maiden much longer. Ask your father to prepare a wagon and mules for us at daybreak. We'll load up the rugs, robes, and sashes for washing. You can ride too, which will be much more pleasant than walking, because the washing place is quite a distance from town."</others>

After saying this, Athena departed for Olympus. Olympus, they say, is the eternal home of the gods. No harsh winds blow there, and neither rain nor snow ever falls. Instead, it is filled with everlasting sunshine and a brilliant, peaceful light, where the blessed gods shine forever. The goddess left for this place after giving the girl her instructions.

Soon, morning arrived and woke Nausicaa. She began to ponder her dream. She went to the other side of the house to tell her parents all about it. She found them in their room. Her mother was by the fireplace, spinning purple yarn with her maidservants. Nausicaa caught her father just as he was leaving to attend a town council meeting, called by the Phaeacian elders. She stopped him and said,

<others>"Papa dear, could you let me have a big, sturdy wagon? I want to take all our dirty clothes to the river and wash them. You're the most important man in this land, so it's only right that you wear a clean shirt when you attend council meetings. Plus, you have five sons at home. Two are married, and the other three are handsome bachelors. You know they always want clean clothes when they go to a dance. I've been thinking about all this."</others>

She didn't say a word about her own wedding; she was too shy. But her father already knew. King Alcinous said, <others>"My dear, you shall have the mules and anything else you wish for. Go on now. The men will prepare a strong, good wagon for you, one that can hold all your clothes."</others>

With that, he gave orders to his servants. The servants brought out the wagon, harnessed the mules, and hitched them up. Meanwhile, the girl brought the clothes from the linen room and loaded them onto the wagon. Her mother prepared a basket filled with all sorts of delicious provisions and a goatskin full of wine. The girl then climbed into the wagon, and her mother handed her a golden flask of oil for her and her maidservants to anoint themselves with. She took the whip and reins and urged the mules forward. The mules set off, their hooves clattering loudly on the road. They pulled tirelessly, carrying Nausicaa, her laundry, and all the maidservants who accompanied her.

When they reached the water, they headed for the washing pools. There, pure water always flowed in abundance, enough to clean any amount of dirty laundry. They unharnessed the mules and let them graze on the sweet, fresh grass growing by the water's edge. They took the clothes from the wagon, put them in the water, and competed to tread them in the pools, stomping out the dirt. After washing the clothes thoroughly, they spread them out by the sea, on a high shingle beach built up by the waves. Then they washed themselves and anointed their bodies with olive oil. After eating their dinner by the stream, they waited for the sun to dry the clothes completely. Once dinner was done, they took off the veils covering their heads and began to play ball. Nausicaa sang for them. Imagine the huntress Artemis going out to the mountains of Taygetus or Erymanthus to hunt wild boars or deer. The wood nymphs, daughters of Aegis-bearing Zeus, play joyfully alongside her. Yet, the goddess Leto feels immense pride seeing her daughter Artemis stand a head taller than the others, shining as the most beautiful among a host of beauties. Nausicaa shone just like that among her maidservants.

It was time for them to head home, and they were folding the clothes and loading them into the wagon. Athena began to think of a way for Odysseus to wake up and meet the beautiful girl who would guide him to the city of the Phaeacians. So, Nausicaa threw a ball to one of her maidservants. But the ball missed the maid and fell into the deep water. Everyone shouted, and the noise woke Odysseus. He sat up from his bed of leaves, wondering what was happening.

<odysseus>"Oh no,"</odysseus> he muttered to himself. <odysseus>"What kind of people have I stumbled upon? Are they cruel, savage barbarians, or do they welcome strangers with kindness? I hear young women's voices, like the nymphs who dance on mountain peaks, by river springs, or in green meadows. At least I'm clearly among people. Let me try to get a look at them."</odysseus>

With these thoughts, he crawled out from under the bush. He broke off a leafy branch to cover his nakedness. He looked like a lion from the wilderness. A lion that roams, exulting in its strength, ignoring wind and rain. When a hungry lion hunts for cattle, sheep, or deer, its eyes blaze. It will even break into a well-fenced farm to catch a sheep. That's how Odysseus appeared to the young women as he approached them, completely naked and desperate. He was in dire need. Seeing him so unkempt and crusted with salt water, the other maidservants scattered, running along the sandy spits that jutted into the sea. But Nausicaa, daughter of Alcinous, stood firm. Athena had filled her heart with courage and banished all fear. She stood directly in front of Odysseus. Odysseus hesitated, wondering whether to approach her, fall at her feet, and embrace her knees as a suppliant, or to stay where he was and beg her for clothes and directions to the town. In the end, he decided it was best to plead from a distance. He worried the girl might be offended if he came too close to clasp her knees. So, he spoke to her with sweet, persuasive words.

<odysseus>"Oh, princess,"</odysseus> he began. <odysseus>"I beg for your help. But tell me, are you a goddess or a mortal woman? If you are a goddess dwelling in the heavens, I can only guess you are Artemis, daughter of Zeus, for your face and form resemble no one else's. If, on the other hand, you are a mortal living on earth, then your father and mother are thrice blessed. Thrice blessed, too, are your brothers and sisters. How proud and delighted they must feel to see such a beautiful child as you going out to a dance! But most blessed of all will be the man who offers the richest wedding gifts and takes you to his home. I have never seen anyone, man or woman, as beautiful as you. I am utterly lost in admiration as I look at you. I can only compare you to a young palm tree I saw on the island of Delos, growing near Apollo's altar. I was there myself, with many of my men, during that journey which began all my troubles. I had never seen such a young plant sprout from the earth, and I admired and marvelled at it then, just as I admire and marvel at you now. I dare not clasp your knees, but I am in great distress. Yesterday was the twentieth day I had been tossed about on the sea. The winds and waves carried me all the way from Ogygia Island to this place. Now fate seems to have thrown me onto this coast, only for me to endure even more suffering. I don't believe my troubles are over yet. It seems the heavens still have much misfortune in store for me.

So now, O princess, please have pity on me. You are the first person I've met in this land, and I know no one else here. Show me the way to your city, and please give me something to wear, even if it's just what you used to wrap your clothes in. May the heavens grant you all your heart's desires: a good husband, a home, and a happy, peaceful family. For there is nothing better in this world than for a husband and wife to live in harmony in their home. It confuses their enemies, gladdens the hearts of their friends, and they themselves know that happiness better than anyone."</odysseus>

Nausicaa replied, <others>"Stranger, you seem to be a sensible and kind-hearted person. Luck is unpredictable. Zeus grants prosperity to both rich and poor as he chooses, so you must accept what he has sent you and make the best of it. Now that you have come to our country, you will not lack for clothes or anything else a foreigner in distress might reasonably expect. I will show you the way to the city, and I will tell you the name of our people. We are called Phaeacians, and I am the daughter of Alcinous, who holds all the power in this land."</others>

Then she called to her maidservants. <others>"Girls, stop right there! Can't you see a man without running away? Do you think he's a robber or a murderer? Neither he nor anyone else can come here to harm us Phaeacians. We are beloved by the gods, living apart on a land's end that juts into the roaring sea, and we have no dealings with other people. This is just a poor man who has lost his way. We must be kind to him. Strangers and foreigners in distress are under Zeus's protection. They will be grateful for whatever they receive. So, girls, give this poor fellow something to eat and drink, and wash him in the stream in a place sheltered from the wind."</others>

At her words, the maidservants stopped running and gathered together. As Nausicaa had instructed, they led Odysseus to a sheltered spot and brought him a shirt and a cloak. They also gave him a small golden flask of oil and told him to go wash in the stream. But Odysseus said, <odysseus>"Young women, please step aside for a moment. I need to wash the brine from my shoulders and anoint myself with oil. It's been far too long since my skin has felt a drop of oil. I cannot wash while you all stand there. I am ashamed to undress in front of so many beautiful young women."</odysseus>

The maidservants stepped aside and went to tell Nausicaa. Meanwhile, Odysseus washed himself in the stream, scrubbing the brine from his back and broad shoulders. After he had thoroughly washed himself and removed all the salt from his hair, he anointed himself with oil and put on the clothes the girl had given him. Athena then made him appear taller and stronger than before. She also made the hair on his head grow thick and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms. Just as a skilled craftsman, trained in all arts by Hephaestus and Athena, gilds a silver plate to make it beautiful, Athena glorified his head and shoulders with a radiant glow. He then went and sat a little way off on the beach. He looked quite young and handsome. The girl gazed at him with admiration. Then she spoke to her maidservants.

<others>“Girls, quiet down for a moment. I have something to say,”</others> Nausicaa announced. <others>“I believe the gods in heaven have sent this man to us Phaeacians. When I first saw him, he looked ordinary, but now his appearance is as magnificent as the gods themselves. If he were to stay here and not leave, I’d wish my future husband would be just like him. Anyway, give him something to eat and drink.”</others>

The maids did as Nausicaa asked, setting food before Odysseus. He ate and drank ravenously, for it had been a long time since he’d had a proper meal. Meanwhile, Nausicaa turned her attention to other tasks. She folded the laundry, placed it in the wagon, and yoked the mules. Then, taking her seat, she called out to Odysseus.

<others>“Stranger,”</others> Nausicaa said, <others>“it’s time to get up and return to town. I’ll introduce you to my excellent father’s house, where I can assure you, you’ll meet all the most important people among the Phaeacians. But you must do exactly as I tell you; I trust you’ll follow my advice, as you seem sensible. As long as we’re passing through fields and farmlands, follow closely behind the wagon with my maids. I’ll lead the way. Soon, however, we’ll reach the town. It’s surrounded by a high wall, with good harbors on either side, each with a narrow entrance. Ships will be docked along the roadside, because every Phaeacian has a spot for their own vessel. In the middle of town, you’ll see the marketplace with a temple of Poseidon. It’s paved with large stones set into the ground. Here, people trade all sorts of ship’s gear, like ropes and sails, and it’s also where oars are made. The Phaeacians aren’t a nation of archers; they know nothing about bows and arrows. Instead, they are seafaring people, proud of their masts, oars, and ships, with which they travel far across the sea.

“I’m afraid of the gossip and rumors that might start about me later on. The people here are very ill-natured, and some low fellow, if he saw us, might say: ‘Who is this handsome stranger going around with Nausicaa? Where did she find him? I suppose she’s going to marry him. Perhaps he’s a vagabond sailor she picked up from some foreign ship, since we have no neighbors. Or maybe some god has finally come down from heaven in answer to her prayers, and she’s going to live with him for the rest of her life. It would be better if she went off and found a husband somewhere else, because she won’t even look at one of the many excellent young Phaeacians who are in love with her.’ They’ll say disparaging things about me like that. And I couldn’t complain, because I’d be shocked myself to see any other girl doing the same. It’s not right to go around with a man in front of everyone, while her parents are still alive and without being married publicly.

“So, if you want my father to give you an escort and help you get home, do exactly as I tell you. You’ll see a beautiful grove of poplars by the roadside, dedicated to Athena. It has a well and a meadow all around it. My father has a field of rich garden ground there, about as far from the town as a man’s voice will carry. Sit down there and wait for a while until the rest of us can get into town and reach my father’s house. Then, when you think we must have arrived, come into town and ask the way to the house of my father, King Alcinous. You’ll have no trouble finding it; any child will point it out to you, for no one else in the whole town has a house as grand as his. Once you pass the gates and go through the outer court, cross the inner court directly to my mother. You’ll find her sitting by the fire, spinning her purple wool by the firelight. It’s a beautiful sight to see her leaning back against one of the main pillars, with all her maids lined up behind her. Close to her seat is my father’s, where he sits and drinks like an immortal god. Don’t mind him, but go up to my mother and grasp her knees if you want to get home quickly. If you can win her over, you can hope to see your own country again, no matter how far away it may be.”</others>

With that, Nausicaa lashed the mules with her whip, and they left the river. The mules pulled the wagon well, their hooves clattering cheerfully on the road. She used her whip with judgment, careful not to go too fast for Odysseus and the maids who were following on foot behind the wagon. As the sun was setting, they arrived at the sacred grove of Athena. There, Odysseus sat down and prayed to the mighty daughter of Zeus.

<odysseus>“Hear me!”</odysseus> Odysseus cried. <odysseus>“Daughter of Aegis-bearing Zeus, tireless one, hear me now! You paid no heed to my prayers when Poseidon was destroying me. Therefore, have pity on me now, and grant that I may find friends and be hospitably received by the Phaeacians.”</odysseus>

As Odysseus prayed, Athena heard his plea. However, she did not show herself to him openly. She was still afraid of her uncle Poseidon, who remained furious in his efforts to prevent Odysseus from returning home.
