Book 24

The Suitors' Ghosts in Hades — Odysseus and His Men Go to Laertes' House — The People of Ithaca Prepare to Attack Odysseus, but Athena Intervenes for Peace

Hermes, the god of Cyllene, gathered the suitors' ghosts. In his hand, he held a beautiful golden staff. With this staff, he could close people's eyes in sleep or wake them whenever he wished. Hermes used it to rouse the ghosts and lead them. They followed him, whimpering and murmuring.

Just like bats squealing as they fall from their cluster and fly around a large cave, the ghosts whimpered and squealed, led by Hermes, the healer of sorrow. They descended into the dark realm of death. They crossed the waters of the Oceanus River and passed the Leucas rock. Then they reached the gates of the sun and the land of dreams. There, they arrived at the Asphodel Fields, where the souls and shadows of those who could no longer work resided.

There, they met the ghost of Achilles, son of Peleus. The ghosts of Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax were also with him. Ajax was the finest and most handsome hero among all the Danaans, second only to Achilles himself.

They gathered around the ghost of Achilles, son of Peleus. Then, the ghost of Agamemnon approached them, looking deeply sorrowful. Around him were also gathered the ghosts of those who had died with him in Aegisthus's house. After a moment, Achilles's ghost spoke first.

<others>"Son of Atreus,"</others> Achilles's ghost said, <others>"when we fought together before Troy, we used to say that Zeus loved you more than any other hero, from beginning to end. You commanded countless brave warriors. Yet, the hand of death, which no mortal can escape, claimed you far too soon. It would have been better if you had fallen at Troy at the peak of your fame. Then the Achaeans would have built a magnificent tomb over your ashes, and your son would have inherited your great name. Instead, you met a most miserable end!"</others>

Agamemnon's ghost replied, <others>"Fortunate son of Peleus! You died at Troy, far from Argos, with the bravest warriors of Troy and Achaea falling around you as they fought for your body. You lay there, vast and mighty, swirling in the dust, your heroic spirit now at peace. We fought the entire day, and we would never have stopped if Zeus hadn't sent a hurricane to halt us.</others>

<others>When we carried you from the battlefield to the ships, we laid you on a bed and washed your fair skin with warm water and ointments. The Danaans tore their hair and wept bitterly around you. Your mother, Thetis, heard the news and came from the sea with her immortal nymphs. A great wailing echoed over the waters, making the Achaeans tremble with fear. They would have fled in panic to their ships if wise old Nestor, whose advice was always true, hadn't stopped them. Nestor said, 'Stop, Argives! Sons of Achaea, do not flee! This is his mother, coming from the sea with her immortal nymphs to see her son's body.'"</others>

<others>"When he spoke, the Achaeans no longer feared. The nymphs, daughters of the old man of the sea, stood around you, weeping bitterly, and clothed you in immortal garments. The nine Muses also came, raising their sweet voices in a lament, calling and answering each other. There wasn't an Argive who didn't weep with pity at the dirge they sang.</others>

<others>For seventeen days and nights, both mortals and immortals mourned you. On the eighteenth day, we offered you to the flames. We sacrificed many fat sheep and oxen around you. You were burned in the garments of the gods, with rich resins and honey. As you burned, heroes, both horsemen and foot soldiers, clashed their armor around the pyre, their footsteps like the tramp of a vast multitude.</others>

<others>When the heavenly flames had finished their work, we gathered your white bones at daybreak and placed them in ointments and pure wine. Your mother, Thetis, brought a golden urn to hold them, a gift from Dionysus and crafted by Hephaestus himself. In this urn, we mingled your bleached bones with those of Patroclus, who had died before you. We also separately enclosed the bones of Antilochus, who had been closer to you than any other comrade after Patroclus was gone.</others>"

<others>"The Argive army built a magnificent tomb over these bones. It stood on a point jutting out over the Hellespont Strait, so that both those living now and those yet to be born could see it from far out at sea. Your mother, Thetis, obtained prizes from the gods and offered them for the noblest Achaeans to compete for. You must have attended many heroes' funerals, seeing young men prepare to compete for prizes to honor a great chieftain's death. But you never saw prizes like those silver-footed Thetis offered in your honor, for the gods loved you deeply.</others>

<others>Even in death, your fame, Achilles, has not faded. Your name will live forever among all humankind. But as for me, what comfort did I find when my days of fighting were over? Zeus decreed my destruction upon my return, by the hands of Aegisthus and my wicked wife."</others>

As they conversed, Hermes soon approached them with the ghosts of the suitors killed by Odysseus. The ghosts of Agamemnon and Achilles were astonished to see them and immediately went over. Agamemnon's ghost recognized Amphimedon, son of Melaneus, who had lived in Ithaca and had been his guest. He began to speak to him.

<others>"Amphimedon,"</others> Agamemnon's ghost asked, <others>"what happened to all you fine young men, all in the prime of your lives, that you've come down here to the underworld? You'd be hard-pressed to find a better group of young men in any city. Did Poseidon stir up winds and waves against you at sea? Or did your enemies kill you on land while you were stealing cattle or raiding, or fighting to defend your wives and city? Answer my question, for I was once your guest. Don't you remember when Menelaus and I came to your house to convince Odysseus to join us with his ships for the Trojan War? It took us a whole month to set sail again because we had such a hard time persuading Odysseus to come with us."</others>

Amphimedon's ghost replied, <others>"Agamemnon, son of Atreus, King of men, I remember everything you've said. I will tell you fully and accurately how our end came about. Odysseus had been gone for a long time, and we were courting his wife. She never flat-out refused to marry, nor did she bring things to a close. In truth, she intended to destroy us. This was the trick she played: she set up a large loom in her room and began to weave an enormous, intricate piece of needlework. 'My dear suitors,' she said, 'Odysseus is truly dead, but please don't pressure me to remarry immediately. Wait until I've finished this burial shroud for the hero Laertes, for when death finally claims him. I don't want my skill in needlework to go unrecorded. He is very wealthy, and the local women will gossip if he's laid to rest without a shroud.' She said this, and we agreed. We watched her work on her great tapestry all day long, but at night, by torchlight, she would unravel the stitches again. She fooled us like this for three years, and we never suspected a thing. But as time passed, in her fourth year, after many moons had waned, one of her maids told us the truth. We caught her in the act of undoing her work, so she had no choice but to finish it. When she showed us the finished robe, after it had been washed, its splendor was like that of the sun or moon."</others>

<others>"Then, some mischievous god led Odysseus to the mountain farm where his swineherd lived. Soon after, his son Telemachus also returned there, having finished his voyage from Pylos. The two of them hatched a plan for our destruction, then came to town. Telemachus arrived first, followed by Odysseus, accompanied by the swineherd. Odysseus was dressed in rags, leaning on a staff, looking like a miserable old beggar. He appeared so unexpectedly that none of us, not even the older men, recognized him. We cursed him and threw things at him. He endured being struck and insulted in his own house without a single word. But when the will of aegis-bearing Zeus inspired him, he and Telemachus took the weapons, hid them in an inner room, and bolted the doors. Then, cunningly, he had his wife offer his bow and a quantity of iron axes for us unfortunate suitors to compete with. This was the beginning of our end. Not one of us could string the bow, or even come close. When it was about to reach Odysseus's hands, we all shouted that it shouldn't be given to him, no matter what he said. But Telemachus insisted he should have it. As soon as Odysseus took the bow, he strung it with ease and shot an arrow straight through the axe-heads. Then he stood on the cloister floor, pouring his arrows onto the ground and glaring fiercely around him. He killed Antinous first, then aimed straight ahead, unleashing deadly arrows that struck one after another. It was clear that some god was helping them. They attacked us with all their might throughout the cloisters, and we heard a hideous sound of groaning as our brains were shattered. The ground boiled with our blood. Agamemnon, this is how we met our end. Our bodies still lie uncared for in Odysseus's house. Our friends back home don't yet know what happened, so they can't lay us out, wash the black blood from our wounds, or mourn us as is due to the departed."</others>

Agamemnon's ghost replied, <others>"Fortunate Odysseus, son of Laertes! You are truly blessed to have a wife like Penelope, daughter of Icarius, endowed with such remarkable wisdom and unwavering loyalty to her husband. Therefore, her virtue will never die. The gods will compose a song celebrating Penelope's steadfast loyalty, and it will be welcomed by all humankind. But how wicked was the daughter of Tyndareus! She murdered her lawful husband, and her song will be hated among people. She brought disgrace upon all women, even the good ones."</others>

They conversed like this in Hades's house, deep within the earth. Meanwhile, Odysseus and his companions left the town and soon arrived at Laertes's beautiful, well-tended farm. Laertes had cultivated this land with immense effort. His house had a lean-to surrounding it, where the slaves who worked for him slept, sat, and ate. Inside the house, an old Sicel woman cared for him on this country farm. When Odysseus arrived, he spoke to his son and the other two men.

<odysseus>"You all go home and slaughter the best pig for dinner. Meanwhile, I want to see if my father will recognize me after all these years, or if he won't."</odysseus>

Odysseus took off his armor and handed it to Eumaeus and Philoetius. They headed straight for home. Odysseus, however, decided to go to the vineyard to test his father. As he walked into the large orchard, he didn't see Dolius, his sons, or any other servants. They were all busy gathering thorny bushes to build a fence for the vineyard, just as the old man had instructed. So Odysseus found his father alone, weeding the grapevines. His father wore a dirty, patched-up old shirt that looked incredibly shabby. He had cowhide straps wrapped around his legs to protect them from thorns, and leather sleeves on his arms. A goatskin cap covered his head, and his face was etched with deep sorrow. Seeing his father so tired, old, and heartbroken, Odysseus stopped beneath a tall pear tree and began to weep. He wasn't sure what to do. Should he rush to embrace him, kiss him, and reveal his return? Or should he first ask questions and see his father's reaction? Finally, he decided it would be best to approach him cleverly. So, he bent down and walked towards his father, who was digging around the plants.

<odysseus>"My good sir,"</odysseus> Odysseus began, <odysseus>"you are truly an excellent gardener. The care you put into everything is amazing! From fig trees and grapevines to olive trees, pear trees, and flower beds, not a single plant has escaped your touch. But if I may be so bold, you seem to care more for your garden than for yourself. You are old, shabby, and dressed in rags. Surely, your master isn't so lazy as to neglect you like this? In fact, your face and bearing show no sign of a slave. They speak of noble birth. You look like an old man who deserves to be well-washed, well-fed, and sleeping comfortably at night. But tell me, honestly: Whose slave are you, and whose garden do you work in? And I have one more question. Is this place I've arrived at truly Ithaca? I just met someone who told me it was. But he was a dull fellow. When I asked about an old friend, he didn't have the patience to listen to my story to the end. I wanted to know if my friend was still alive, or if he had already gone to the house of Hades. Believe me, when I was in my homeland, this man once visited my house. I had never met a stranger I liked more than him. He told me his family was from Ithaca, and his father was Laertes, son of Arceisius. I treated him generously, letting him enjoy all the riches of my home. And when he left, I gave him all the customary gifts: seven talents of pure gold and a pure silver cup with flower patterns. I also gave him twelve light cloaks and twelve tapestries, twelve more cloaks, each unique, along with twelve rugs, twelve beautiful capes, and twelve shirts. On top of all that, I added four beautiful women, skilled in every useful art, and let him choose whichever he wished."</odysseus>

His father answered, tears streaming down his face. <others>"My good sir, you have indeed come to the country you spoke of. But this land has fallen into the hands of wicked people. All those precious gifts you gave would now be useless. If you had met that friend alive in Ithaca, he would have treated you generously. He would have surely repaid you fully when you left, remembering your kindness and gifts. But tell me, honestly: How many years has it been since you hosted this guest, my son, who was always so unlucky? Alas! He died far from his homeland. The fish of the sea must have eaten him, or he became food for birds and wild beasts on some distant shore. Neither his mother nor I, his father, could embrace him or prepare him for burial. His noble wife, Penelope, with her rich dowry, couldn't mourn him properly at his deathbed. She couldn't close his eyes with the proper rites for the dead. But now tell me, honestly. I want to know: Who are you, and where do you come from? Tell me about your homeland and your parents. Where is the ship that brought you and your men to Ithaca? Or did you come as a passenger on someone else's ship, and they have already sailed away?"</others>

<odysseus>"I will tell you everything, very honestly,"</odysseus> Odysseus replied. <odysseus>"I am from Alybas, where I have a fine house. I am Eperitus, son of King Apheidas, who was the son of Polypemon. When I left Sicania, the heavens steered my ship off course, and I ended up here against my will. My ship is anchored out there, in the wide field just outside the town. This year marks five years since Odysseus left my homeland. Poor friend! But when he left me, the omens were good. All the birds flew to our right, and we were happy to see that as we parted ways. We held onto every hope that we would meet again, share our friendship, and exchange gifts."</odysseus>

A deep cloud of sorrow fell upon Laertes as he listened to his son's words. He scooped up handfuls of earth and poured them over his white hair, groaning deeply. Odysseus's heart ached the moment he saw his father, and his nostrils quivered. He rushed to his father, threw his arms around him, and kissed him. <odysseus>"Father,"</odysseus> he said, <odysseus>"it is I, the one you've been searching for! I have returned after twenty long years. Stop your sighing and lamenting now. We have no time to lose. I have killed all the suitors in my house, punishing them for their arrogance and crimes."</odysseus>

<others>"If you truly are my son Odysseus,"</others> Laertes replied, <others>"and you have come back, you must give me clear proof to convince me."</others>

<odysseus>"First, look at this scar,"</odysseus> Odysseus answered. <odysseus>"I got it from a boar's tusk while hunting on Mount Parnassus. You and my mother sent me to my grandfather Autolycus, your father, to receive the gifts he had promised when he visited us. And do you remember the trees in the vineyard that you gave me? I followed you around the garden, asking you all sorts of questions about them. We went over every single tree, and you told me their names and what kind they were. You gave me thirteen pear trees, ten apple trees, and forty fig trees. You also promised me fifty rows of grapevines. Corn was planted between each row, and they produced all kinds of grapes whenever the hot sun shone down on them."</odysseus>

Laertes's strength left him when he heard his son's convincing proofs. He threw his arms around Odysseus, who had to support him to keep him from collapsing. But as Laertes came to his senses and began to recover, he cried out, <others>"Oh, mighty Zeus! If the suitors have truly been punished for their arrogance and foolishness, then the gods are still watching over us from Olympus after all! But I am terribly afraid that all the townspeople of Ithaca will soon rush here. They will send messengers everywhere, throughout all the cities of Cephallenia."</others>

Odysseus answered, <odysseus>"Don't worry, and put your mind at ease. Don't trouble yourself about that. Now, let's go to the house right next to your garden. I've already told Telemachus, Philoetius, and Eumaeus to go there and get dinner ready as quickly as they can."</odysseus>

Talking like this, the two men made their way to the house. When they arrived, they found Telemachus, the stockman, and the swineherd busy cutting meat and mixing wine with water. Then, an old Sicel woman took Laertes inside. She washed him and anointed him with oil. She dressed him in a fine cloak. Then, the goddess Athena herself appeared. She made him taller and more imposing than before, transforming him into a truly dignified figure. When Laertes returned, his son Odysseus was amazed. His father looked like a god! <odysseus>"My dear father,"</odysseus> Odysseus said, <odysseus>"some god has made you much taller and more handsome!"</odysseus>

Laertes replied, <others>"Oh, by Zeus, Athena, and Apollo! How I wish I were the man I was when I ruled the Cephallenians and captured Nerikum, that mighty fortress on the cape! If I had been in our house yesterday, still in my armor, just as I was back then, I could have stood by you and helped you fight against the suitors. I would have killed so many of them, and you would have rejoiced to see it!"</others>

As the two men talked, the others finished their work. Once the feast was ready, they stopped what they were doing and took their places on the benches and seats. They began to eat. After a little while, old Dolius and his sons arrived, having stopped their work. Their mother, the Sicel woman who now cared for Laertes in his old age, had gone to fetch them. When they saw Odysseus and realized it was truly him, they stood there, completely stunned. But Odysseus, with a kind smile, gently urged them. <odysseus>"Sit down and have dinner, old man,"</odysseus> he said. <odysseus>"Put your surprise aside for a moment. We've been wanting to start eating for a while now, and we were waiting for you."</odysseus>

Then Dolius reached out both hands and approached Odysseus. He took his master's hand, kissed his wrist, and said, <others>"Master, we have longed for your return for so many years! Now, just when we had given up hope, heaven has brought you back to us. All hail! May the gods grant you prosperity. But tell me, does Queen Penelope already know you're back, or should we send someone to tell her?"</others>

<odysseus>"Old man,"</odysseus> Odysseus replied, <odysseus>"Queen Penelope already knows, so you don't need to worry about that."</odysseus> Odysseus then took his seat. Dolius's sons gathered around him, greeting him and embracing him one after another. Then, they took their places in order next to their father Dolius.

While they were busy with dinner, rumors spread quickly through the town. Everyone soon heard about the terrible fate that had struck the suitors. As soon as people heard, they gathered from every direction, groaning and shouting angrily outside Odysseus's house. They carried away the dead, each family burying their own. The bodies of those from other towns were placed on fishing boats, for fishermen to take them back to their homelands. Afterward, the townspeople gathered angrily in the public square. Once everyone was there, Eupeithes began to speak. He was heartbroken over the death of his son Antinous, who had been the first man killed by Odysseus. Weeping bitterly, he cried out: <others>"My friends, this man has done a terrible wrong to the Achaeans! He took many of our finest warriors with him in his fleet, only to lose both his ships and his men. And now, after returning, he has killed all the most important men among the Cephallenians! We must act now, before he can escape to Pylos or to Elis, where the Epeians rule. If we don't, we will be shamed forever! It will be an everlasting disgrace if we don't avenge the murders of our sons and brothers. For my part, I find no more joy in life; I would rather die right now! So let's rise up quickly and chase after them, before they can cross over to the mainland!"</others>

As Eupeithes wept and spoke, everyone felt pity for him. But at that very moment, Medon and the bard Phemius, who had just woken up, approached them from Odysseus's house. Everyone was astonished to see them. They stood in the middle of the square, and Medon spoke: <others>"People of Ithaca, listen to me! Odysseus did not do these things against the will of the gods. I myself saw an immortal god, disguised as Mentor, standing right beside Odysseus. This god sometimes encouraged Odysseus from the front. Other times, the god furiously moved through the palace, attacking the suitors and making them fall one on top of another!"</others>

Pale fear gripped everyone at Medon's words. Then, old Halitherses, son of Mastor, stood up. He was the only one among them who knew both the past and the future. So he spoke to them plainly and honestly.

<others>"People of Ithaca,"</others> Halitherses declared, <others>"it is entirely your own fault that things have turned out this way! We warned you to stop your sons' foolishness, but you listened neither to me nor to Mentor. They wasted the wealth of a leader they thought would never return. They insulted his wife and indulged in every kind of reckless behavior. But now, listen to what I say and do as I tell you: Do not go against Odysseus! If you do, you will only bring disaster down upon your own heads."</others>

As soon as he finished speaking, more than half the people shouted loudly and immediately left the square. But the rest stayed put. They didn't like Halitherses's speech and chose to side with Eupeithes. They quickly armed themselves. Once ready, they gathered in front of the city. Eupeithes, in his foolishness, led them on. He believed he was going to avenge his son's death. But in truth, he was destined never to return, and would lose his own life in that very attempt.

Then Athena spoke to Zeus. <others>"Father, Son of Cronus, King of Kings, please answer my question. What are you planning to do now? Will you let them keep fighting, or will you bring peace between them?"</others>

Zeus replied, <others>"My daughter, why do you ask me? Wasn't it your plan for Odysseus to return home and take revenge on the suitors? Do as you wish. But I will tell you what I think is the most reasonable solution. Now that Odysseus has finished his revenge, let's have them make a solemn oath so he can continue to rule. We will also make the others forgive and forget the slaughter of their sons and brothers. This way, they will all become friends again, just like before, and peace and prosperity will reign."</others>

This was exactly what Athena had been hoping for, so she shot down like an arrow from the highest peak of Mount Olympus.

When Laertes and the others finished their dinner, Odysseus spoke first. <odysseus>"Someone go out and check if they are getting close to us."</odysseus> One of Dolius's sons went out as he was told. Standing at the threshold, he saw that they were all very close. He told Odysseus, <others>"They're here! Let's arm ourselves right away!"</others>

They armed themselves as quickly as possible. There was Odysseus, his three loyal men, and Dolius's six sons. Laertes and Dolius were also among them. Even though they were white-haired old men, they had no choice but to step forward as warriors. Once everyone was armed, they opened the gates and went outside. Odysseus led the way.

Just then, Zeus's daughter Athena approached them, disguised as Mentor in both form and voice. Odysseus was glad to see her. He turned to his son, Telemachus, and said, <odysseus>"Telemachus, you are about to enter a battle that will test everyone's courage. So, make sure you don't disgrace your ancestors, who were famous throughout the world for their strength and bravery."</odysseus>

Telemachus replied, <telemachus>"Father, you speak truly. You'll see, I have no intention of disgracing our family name."</telemachus>

Laertes was delighted when he heard this. He exclaimed with admiration, <others>"Good heavens, what a joyful day this is! My son and grandson are competing with each other in bravery!"</others>

At that moment, Athena came closer to him and said, <others>"Son of Arceisius, my dearest friend in the world, pray to the blue-eyed goddess and to Zeus, her father. Then, poise your spear and throw it!"</others>

As she spoke, new energy surged through Laertes' body. After he prayed to the goddess, he poised his spear and threw it. The spear struck Eupeithes' helmet. The helmet couldn't stop it, and the spear pierced right through. Eupeithes fell heavily to the ground, his armor clattering loudly. Meanwhile, Odysseus and his son charged into the enemy's front line, attacking them with swords and spears. They were determined to kill every single one of them, ensuring they would never return home. But Athena cried out loudly, making everyone pause. <others>"People of Ithaca,"</others> she shouted, <others>"stop this terrible war! Settle this matter now, without any more bloodshed!"</others>

At that moment, everyone was gripped by pale fear. They were so startled by the goddess's voice that they dropped their weapons and fled back to the city to save their lives. But Odysseus let out a great cry and swooped down on his enemies like a soaring eagle. Then Zeus threw a flaming thunderbolt. It landed right in front of Athena. Athena then told Odysseus, <others>"Odysseus, noble son of Laertes, stop this war! Otherwise, Zeus will be angry with you."</others>

When Athena spoke, Odysseus gladly obeyed her. Athena then returned to the form and voice of Mentor. She immediately arranged a peace treaty between the two opposing sides.
