Chapter 1

Jonathan Harker's Journal

Written in shorthand.

May 3. Bistritz. I left Munich at 8:35 PM on May 1st and arrived in Vienna early the next morning. I was originally supposed to arrive at 6:46, but the train was an hour late, so I arrived around 7:46. Budapest seemed like a truly wonderful place. Though catching a glimpse from the train and taking a short walk on the streets was all I could do. Having arrived late and with departure imminent, I was afraid to go too far from the station. It felt as if I were leaving the West and entering the East. We crossed a magnificent Western-style bridge over the deep and wide Danube River, and from there, we entered a region where the traditions of Turkish rule still remained.

We departed on time and arrived at Klausenburg after sunset. I stayed the night at the Hotel Royale. For dinner, I had a chicken dish cooked with red pepper. It was very delicious, but I became terribly thirsty after eating it. I must be sure to get the recipe for Mina. I asked the waiter, and he said this dish was a representative local food called paprika hendl. He informed me that I would be able to taste this dish anywhere along the Carpathian Mountains. The little German I knew was very useful here. In fact, if I hadn't known German, I don't know how I would have managed.

When I had some spare time in London, I visited the British Museum. I studied Transylvania by looking up books and maps in its library. It seemed that it would be helpful to know about the country in advance if I were to do business with a nobleman of that region. The area Count Dracula mentioned was in the extreme east of the country. It was where the borders of three states met: Transylvania, Moldavia, and Bukovina. It was located in the middle of the Carpathian Mountains, the wildest and least known region in Europe. There are no maps here yet that are as detailed as the ones back home, so I could not find a map that showed the exact location of Castle Dracula. However, Bistritz, the post town the Count mentioned, was a fairly well-known place. I should jot down a few notes here so that I can refresh my memory when I tell Mina stories of my travels later.

The population of Transylvania is divided into four distinct groups. In the south, there are the Saxons, who live mixed with the Wallachians, the descendants of the Dacians. In the west are the Magyars, and in the east and north live the Szekelys. The place I am going to is the region of the Szekelys. They claim to be descendants of Attila and the Huns. It might be true, for when the Magyars conquered this country in the 11th century, the Huns were already living there. I read in a book that all the superstitions of the world are gathered in the horseshoe-shaped Carpathian Mountains. It is like a vortex of superstitions. If so, I think some quite interesting things will happen during my stay. I must be sure to ask the Count about these superstitions.

That night, I did not sleep well. The bed was comfortable, but I had many strange dreams. There was a dog barking under my window all night, which might have been the reason. Or perhaps it was because of the spicy paprika dish. Even after drinking all the water in the room, I continued to feel thirsty. It was only at dawn that I finally fell asleep. Then I was awakened by a loud, continuous knocking at the door. I suppose I must have been very deeply asleep at that time. For breakfast, I had the paprika dish again, along with a cornmeal porridge called mamaliga and a meat-stuffed eggplant dish called impletata. It was an excellent meal. I must get this recipe too. I ate my meal in a hurry as the train was scheduled to depart shortly before 8 o'clock. I ran to the station at 7:30, but the train only started moving after I had sat in the carriage and waited for over an hour. It seems that the further east you go, the less punctual the trains are. I wonder how late they would be in China!

All day long, we traveled slowly through beautiful scenery. Sometimes I saw a small town or a castle on a steep hill, looking like something out of an illustration in an old book. Other times, we ran along a wide river. Looking at the stony riverbanks, it seemed that the water would occasionally flood significantly. To carve out the riverbanks like that, the current must be very strong and fierce. At every station, there were groups of people, and their clothing varied greatly. Some wore short jackets, round hats, and ordinary trousers, like the peasants back home or those I had seen in France and Germany. However, there were also those wearing very colorful clothes. From a distance, the women looked pretty, but up close, their waists seemed somewhat thick. They were all wearing clothes with white sleeves, and over their petticoats, they wore large belts with fluttering pieces of cloth, like a ballerina's dress. The strangest people were the Slovaks. They looked much rougher than the others. They wore large cowboy hats, baggy, dull white trousers, and white linen shirts. They also wore heavy, massive leather belts studded with brass nails. They had long black hair and thick black mustaches, and wore long boots into which their trousers were tucked. They looked very picturesque, but at the same time a bit frightening. If they stood on a theatrical stage, they would look exactly like a band of ancient brigands. But I heard that they are actually very simple and shy.

It was almost dark when we arrived at Bistritz. It was a very interesting old town. Being situated right on the border leading to Bukovina through the Borgo Pass, it had experienced a very violent history in the past, and traces of that remained intact. Fifty years ago, terrible fires broke out five times, destroying parts of the town. I was told that in the early 1600s, it underwent a siege for three weeks, and 13,000 people lost their lives due to war, starvation, and disease.

Count Dracula had told me to stay at the Golden Crown Hotel. To my delight, it was exactly in the very old style. I wanted to experience as much of the local culture as possible. They were clearly expecting me. When I arrived at the door, a cheerful old woman dressed in traditional peasant clothing greeted me. The old woman wore a long apron made of colorful, tight-fitting cloth both in front and back, over a white undergarment. As I approached, the old woman bowed her head and asked, "Are you the English gentleman?" I answered, "Yes, I am Jonathan Harker." The old woman smiled and passed some message to an old man wearing a white shirt. The old man left the room and immediately returned holding a letter. The contents of the letter were as follows.

"My friend, welcome to the Carpathians. I have been eagerly expecting you. Rest well tonight. Tomorrow at 3 PM, a coach bound for Bukovina will depart. I have reserved your seat. My carriage will be waiting at the Borgo Pass to pick you up. I hope your journey from London was comfortable, and I hope you will enjoy your stay in my beautiful land. Your friend, Dracula."

May 4. I found out that the hotel owner had received a letter from the Count to reserve the best seat on the coach for me. But when I asked for details, he suddenly grew quiet. He pretended not to understand my German. That could not be, since he had understood me perfectly before. He and his wife, the old woman who had welcomed me, looked at each other with terrified expressions. He muttered that money was enclosed in the letter, and that was all he knew. When I asked if they knew about Count Dracula or his castle, both of them crossed themselves. They said they knew nothing at all and refused to speak any further. It was almost time to leave, so there was no time to ask anyone else. The whole situation became very mysterious and made me feel uneasy.

Just before I left, the old woman came up to my room. She was extremely anxious and acted almost hysterically.

"Must you go? Oh, young master, must you go?" the old woman asked. She was in such an excited state that she forgot her German and mixed it with another language I did not know. I had to ask several questions to figure out what she meant. When I told her that I had to leave on important business, she asked again.

"Do you know what day it is today?" I answered that it was May 4th. She shook her head and said.

"Oh, yes! I know that too. But do you know what day it really is?" When I said I did not understand, she explained.

"Today is the eve of St. George's Day. Don't you know that tonight at midnight, all the evil things in the world will have sway? Do you know where you are going and what dangers you are walking into!" She was in such distress that I tried to comfort her, but to no avail. Finally, she fell on her knees and begged me not to go, to wait at least a day or two. It seemed like nonsense, but I did not feel at ease. But I had business to do, and nothing could stop me. I raised her up and told her seriously that I thanked her for her concern, but my duty was urgent and I simply had to leave. She stood up, wiped her tears, took a crucifix necklace from her neck, and offered it to me. I did not know what to do. As a member of the Church of England, I was taught to stay away from such things as rosaries. But it felt rude to refuse such a kind and concerned old woman. She must have noticed my hesitation, for she placed the rosary around my neck and said, "Take it, for your mother's sake." Then she left the room. I am writing this in my journal as I wait for the coach, which is late, as usual. The crucifix is still hanging around my neck. I do not know if it is because of the old woman's fears, the local ghost stories, or the crucifix itself, but I am not as perfectly at ease as usual. If this notebook reaches Mina before I do, let this be my farewell. Here comes the coach!

May 5. The Castle. The grey morning has passed. The sun is high over the distant jagged horizon. It is so far away that I cannot distinguish if it is covered with trees or hills. I am not sleepy. Since no one will wake me until I get up on my own, I will write until sleep comes. Many strange things have happened. Just in case someone reads this and thinks I ate too much rich food before leaving Bistritz and saw illusions, I will write down exactly what I had for dinner. I had something called robber's steak. It was a dish of bacon, onion, and beef seasoned with red pepper, skewered on sticks and roasted over a fire. The wine was Golden Mediasch, which left a strange but pleasant sting on the tongue. I drank only two glasses of it, and ate nothing else.

When I got into the coach, the driver was talking with the landlady. They were clearly talking about me. Because they looked at me from time to time. The people sitting outside the inn also came over to listen, and then looked at me with sympathetic eyes. They repeated strange words in several different languages, and I secretly took out my dictionary and tried to translate them. They were not comforting words. I heard "Ordog" meaning Satan, "pokol" meaning hell, "stregoica" meaning witch, as well as the words "vrolok" and "vlkoslak," which mean werewolf or vampire in Slovak and Serbian. I must ask the Count about these superstitions.

As we left, all the people gathered around the inn door crossed themselves and pointed two fingers towards me. I asked a fellow passenger what that meant. He was silent at first, but upon learning that I was an Englishman, he explained that it was a charm against the evil eye. It was not a pleasant start to a journey where I was going to an unknown place to meet an unknown man. But since everyone was so kind and genuinely concerned about me, I was deeply moved. I will never forget the last view of the inn yard. The sight of those colorful people standing by the wide archway, crossing themselves against a background of beautiful oleanders and orange trees. Then our driver, wearing large white linen trousers, cracked his long whip over his four small horses, and we began our journey.

The scenery was so beautiful that I soon forgot my fears. We passed through green, gently rolling hills covered with forests. Sometimes there were steep hills with trees or farmhouses at the top. Fruit trees such as apples, plums, pears, and cherries were in full bloom. As we passed by, fallen petals were scattered over the green grass. The rough road wound its way through the green hills, often disappearing into curves of grass or dark pine forests. We seemed to be flying down the road in a tremendous hurry. I did not understand why we had to hurry so much, but the driver clearly wanted to reach the Borgo Pass quickly. I was told that the road is very good in summer, but still rough now after the winter snows have melted. People here say they deliberately leave the roads rough so that foreign enemy troops cannot easily invade.

Beyond the green hills appeared the massive, heavily forested slopes of the Carpathian Mountains. The mountain range towered high on both sides of us. The afternoon sunlight shone on the mountains, revealing dazzling colors. The shaded areas were deep blue and purple, the places where grass and rocks mixed were green and brown, and endlessly continuing jagged rocks led up to snow-covered peaks. We saw deep valleys, and sometimes caught glimpses of white waterfalls. As we rounded a hill, one of my fellow passengers touched my arm. A massive snow-covered mountain peak appeared right before us.

"Look! Isten szek! God's seat!" he said, reverently crossing himself.

As we continued our journey, the sun sank lower, and the evening shadows began to creep around us. The snow-covered mountain peaks were still catching the fading sunlight, glowing with a delicate pink hue. We passed many local peasants wearing colorful clothes. I noticed that many of them suffered from goiters on their necks. There were many crosses along the road, and my fellow passengers crossed themselves every time they passed one. Sometimes there were peasants kneeling at small shrines, praying so deeply that they did not even look up as our coach went by. I saw many novelties, such as hay stored among the branches of trees, and beautiful white birch trees shining like silver. Occasionally, long, snake-like peasant carts, built to travel on the rough roads, also passed by. Inside the carts, groups of peasants rode, holding long wooden staffs with axes at the ends. As night fell, it grew very cold. A thick mist settled over the oaks, beeches, and pines. The fir trees stood out darkly against the snow. Sometimes when the road cut through dense pine forests, the forest seemed to enclose us. Everything looked more eerie and strange because of the grey lichen clinging to the trees. The mountains were so steep that no matter how much the driver hurried, the horses had to walk slowly. I wanted to get out of the carriage and walk up the hill, but the driver would not allow it. "No, no," he said. "You must not walk here. The dogs are too fierce." Then he smiled meaningfully and added, "And you will see enough of fierce things before you go to sleep tonight." The only time he stopped was to quickly light the coach lamps.

As it grew dark, the passengers became very anxious. They kept urging the driver to go faster. The driver mercilessly whipped the horses and shouted to make them run faster. A gap appeared before us between the dark hills. The passengers became even more excited. The old coach swayed like a ship on a stormy sea. I had to hold on tight. When the road leveled out, we seemed to fly. The mountains surrounded us. We were entering the Borgo Pass. One by one, the passengers pressed small gifts into my hands. They were strange objects, but they contained goodwill and blessings, and charms against the evil eye. The driver leaned forward, and the passengers peered eagerly into the darkness. They were clearly expecting something to happen, but no one explained it to me. Suddenly, the end of the pass appeared before us. Dark storm clouds rolled overhead, and the air felt heavy, as if thunder might strike. I looked out, expecting Count Dracula's carriage lamps to shine in the darkness, but there was nothing. The light from our own coach lamps was the only light. The passengers let out a sigh of relief, which made me feel all the more disappointed. Just as I was wondering what to do, the driver looked at his watch and whispered, "We are an hour early." Then, in clumsy German, he spoke to me.

"There is no carriage here. It seems there is no one waiting for you anyway, sir. You had better come with us to Bukovina and return tomorrow or the next day." While he was speaking, the horses began to neigh and snort, plunging wildly. The driver struggled to control the horses. Then the peasants started screaming again and crossing themselves. A black carriage drawn by four horses dashed up behind us and stopped beside our coach. The horses were magnificent animals, black as coal. The driver was a tall man, with a long brown beard and a large black hat hiding his face. I could only see two eyes gleaming very bright and red in the lamplight. He spoke to our driver.

"You are early tonight, my friend." The driver stammered in reply,

"The English gentleman was in a hurry." The stranger replied.

"So you wanted to take him on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me, my friend. I know too much, and my horses are swift." As he spoke, he smiled. The lamplight revealed a hard mouth with very red lips and sharp teeth as white as ivory. One of my fellow passengers whispered a line from an old poem.

"For the dead travel fast."

The strange driver heard this and smiled again. The passenger quickly turned his head and crossed himself. "Give me the gentleman's luggage," the dark driver commanded. My bags were quickly handed over. I stepped out of the coach. The dark driver reached out to help me alight. His grip was like steel, possessing enormous strength. Without a word, he shook the reins, and we dashed into the darkness of the pass. Looking back, I saw my old fellow passengers crossing themselves in the light of the coach lamps. Then their driver cracked his whip, and they quickly disappeared toward Bukovina. As they faded into the darkness, I felt a strange chill and a deep loneliness. But the driver threw a cloak over my shoulders and laid a blanket across my knees. He spoke in fluent German.

"The night is chill, sir. My master, the Count, commanded me to take good care of you. There is some plum brandy of this region under your seat, so please drink if you wish." I did not drink, but just knowing it was there brought me comfort. I felt strange and very afraid. If there had been any other option, I would not have chosen this journey in the dark night. The carriage dashed forward furiously. Soon we turned down another road. It seemed as if we were continually circling the same spot. I wanted to ask the driver what was happening, but I was too afraid. I checked my watch by the light of a match. It was nearing midnight. Recalling all the superstitions I had just heard, I was seized by sudden fear. I waited in a sickening tension.

Then, a dog began to bark at a distant farmhouse. It was a long, terrified howl. Another dog joined in, and then another, until soon the whole countryside echoed with their wild howling. The horses grew terrified and tried to bolt, but the driver spoke to them calmly, and they quieted down. Then a louder, sharper howling began from the mountains. It was the sound of wolves. This sound struck terror into both the horses and myself. I wanted to jump out and run away. The horses leaped wildly, and the driver had to use immense strength to prevent them from bolting. After a few minutes, my ears grew accustomed to the sound, and the horses had calmed down enough for the driver to alight. He patted the horses and whispered something in their ears. It worked perfectly. The horses were still trembling, but they were under control again. He returned to his seat and drove at top speed. This time, he suddenly turned down a narrow, steep road to the right.

We drove into a dense forest. The trees arched completely over the road like a dark tunnel. It grew colder and colder, and fine snow began to fall, blanketing everything in white. The barking of the dogs could be heard faintly from behind, but the howling of the wolves drew nearer and nearer. It was as if they were surrounding us. I was terribly afraid. The driver did not seem to mind at all. He kept scanning the darkness to the left and right, but I could see nothing.

Suddenly, on our left, I saw a faintly flickering blue flame. The driver saw it too. He stopped the horses, jumped down, and disappeared into the darkness. The howling of the wolves was so close that I did not know what to do. Before I had time to think, he reappeared, climbed into the carriage without a word, and we went on. This happened several times. Once, the flame was close enough that I could see him clearly. He walked up to the blue flame and arranged several stones around it. The strange thing was that his body did not obstruct the light of the flame. I could still see the flickering flame right through his body! I thought my eyes were playing tricks on me in the darkness. After that, we saw no more blue flames, and tore forward as the wolves howled in a circle around us.

Later, the driver left the carriage for a longer period. While he was away, the horses fell into an even greater state of panic than before. Since the wolves had stopped howling, I could not understand why the horses were so frightened. Then the moon shone through the dark clouds, and I discovered the reason. We were completely surrounded by a pack of wolves. They had white teeth, red tongues, and shaggy fur. They were completely silent, and that was more terrifying than when they had been howling. I was paralyzed with fear.

Suddenly, the wolves began to howl again. The horses reared on their hind legs and rolled their eyes in panic, but they were trapped within the circle of wolves. I shouted and beat the side of the carriage to frighten the wolves away so the driver could return. Somehow, he appeared on the road. He shouted a powerful command and waved his long arms as if pushing away an invisible wall. The wolves drew back. Heavy clouds obscured the moon, and we plunged back into darkness.

When the light returned, the driver was back in the carriage, and the wolves were gone. It was so bizarre and dreadful that I did not dare to speak or move. The journey seemed endless. We went higher and higher into the mountains. Suddenly, I realized that the driver was pulling the horses up into the courtyard of a massive, ruined castle. No light leaked from its large, black windows, and its broken walls formed a jagged silhouette against the moonlit sky.
