*       *       *       *       *

Later. - I am so glad I did that. And even more glad that I kept that resolution. While tossing and turning unable to sleep, I only heard the clock strike two (around 2 AM), when the ward night watchman rushed up and reported that Renfield had escaped. Knowing he was too dangerous a patient to let roam free without restraint, I hastily threw on some clothes and ran straight downstairs. There was no telling what harm his dangerous delusions might inflict on strangers. The attendant was waiting for me. He said just ten minutes ago when he looked through the observation window, the patient seemed to be sleeping in his bed. Then, startled by the sound of the window being ripped out, he ran over and saw the patient's feet slipping out the window, so he urgently sent someone to fetch me. Being in his nightclothes, he couldn't have run far. The attendant judged that chasing him while he was exiting the building might actually result in losing him, so it was better to watch his movements to see where he was heading. Renfield was large, so it was hard for him to slip out the window all at once. Being thin, I climbed out the window feet first with the attendant's help, and landed safely without injury as it was only a few feet above the ground. Hearing from the attendant that the patient turned left and ran straight ahead, I also chased after him at top speed. As I passed through a dense patch of trees, I saw a white figure easily leaping over the high wall separating the asylum and the abandoned Carfax estate.

Fearing that our patient might do something unpredictable, I immediately turned back and instructed the watchman to bring three or four men and follow me into the Carfax estate. I found a ladder myself, climbed over the wall, and jumped down the other side. Seeing Renfield's figure dart behind a corner of the house, I ran after him. Running around to the back of the house, I found Renfield clinging tightly to the old, iron-studded oak door of the chapel. He seemed to be conversing with someone, but I didn't dare get close enough to eavesdrop on what he was saying, lest he get startled and run away. Chasing a swarm of lost bees is preferable to chasing a naked madman gripped by an instinct to escape! However, after a few minutes, realizing he was completely oblivious to his surroundings, I mustered the courage to take a step closer. I felt much more at ease because my men had climbed over the wall and surrounded him. I clearly heard what he was saying.

"Master, I am here to do your bidding. I am your slave, and I will be loyal, so please grant me my reward. I have worshipped you from afar for a very long time. Now that you have drawn near, simply give the command. Beloved Master, when you bestow your grace, you won't pass me by and ignore me, will you?"

At any rate, he is merely a snobbish, selfish old man. Even while firmly believing that God has truly descended, he is calculating his cut in his head. His manias are indeed a stunning combination. When we pounced on him, he resisted fiercely like a tiger. He was more like a beast than a human, and his strength was enormous. I had never seen a madman explode with such ferocious rage, and I never want to see it again. It's a huge relief that we discovered his monstrous strength and dangerous nature in time. With that level of strength and obsession, there's no telling what terrible things he might have done before being locked in the ward. Anyway, the fellow is a rat in a trap now. Even the master of prison breaks, Jack Sheppard, wouldn't be able to undo the straitjacket binding him now, and he is securely chained to the wall of a padded solitary confinement cell. His occasional screams are terrifying, but the silence that follows is even more chilling. Because every single one of his gestures and tossing means murder.

Just a moment ago, he spoke coherently for the first time.

"I shall wait, Master. Coming—coming—coming!"

So I took a hint from those words and "have come" (going to bed). I was so excited that I almost ruined my sleep, but writing this journal has calmed my mind a bit, and I think I'll be able to get some shut-eye tonight.
