제20장

조나단 하커의 일기

10월 1일, 저녁. —나는 베스널 그린(런던 동부의 빈민가)에 있는 토머스 스넬링의 집을 찾아갔습니다. 하지만 불행히도 그는 아무것도 기억할 수 있는 상태가 아니었습니다. 내가 온다는 소식을 듣고 맥주를 마실 생각에 너무 들뜬 나머지, 너무 일찍부터 폭음을 시작해 버렸기 때문입니다. 하지만 아주 선량해 보이는 그의 아내를 통해, 그가 스몰렛이라는 사람의 조수일 뿐이며 두 사람 중 진짜 책임자는 스몰렛이라는 사실을 알게 되었습니다. 그래서 나는 즉시 왈워스(런던 남부)로 마차를 몰아 조셉 스몰렛 씨를 찾아냈습니다. 그는 셔츠 차림으로 집에 있었고, 접시에 늦은 차를 부어 마시고 있었습니다. 그는 예의 바르고 지적인 사람이었으며, 아주 성실하고 믿을 수 있는 노동자의 표본 같았습니다. 자기만의 확고한 생각도 있는 사람이었죠. 그는 궤짝들과 관련된 일을 모두 기억하고 있었습니다. 바지 엉덩이 쪽의 알 수 없는 주머니에서 끝이 닳아빠진 낡은 수첩을 꺼내더니, 진하고 반쯤 지워진 연필로 휘갈겨 쓴 암호 같은 기록들을 보며 궤짝들의 목적지를 알려주었습니다. 그의 말에 따르면, 카팩스(드라큘라 백작이 구입한 영지)에서 실어 온 마차 한 대 분량 중 여섯 개는 마일 엔드 뉴 타운의 칙샌드 가 197번지에 내렸고, 다른 여섯 개는 버몬지의 자메이카 레인에 내려놓았다고 합니다. 만약 백작이 런던 전역에 자신의 끔찍한 은신처를 흩어놓을 작정이라면, 나중에 더 넓게 퍼뜨리기 위해 이 장소들을 첫 번째 배달지로 선택했을 것입니다. 그가 이렇게 체계적으로 일을 처리하는 것을 보니, 런던의 두 지역에만 머물 생각은 아닌 것 같았습니다. 그는 이제 템스 강 북부의 맨 동쪽, 남부의 동쪽, 그리고 남쪽에 자리를 잡은 것입니다. 악마 같은 그의 계획에서 북쪽과 서쪽을 빼놓을 리는 없습니다. —가장 번화한 시내 중심가나 고급스러운 남서부, 서부는 말할 것도 없지요. 나는 다시 스몰렛에게 돌아가서, 카팩스에서 다른 궤짝들을 실어 간 적이 있는지 물었습니다.

그가 대답했습니다. —

"저기, 나리. 저한테 아주 후하게 대해주셨으니" —나는 그에게 10실링짜리 금화를 주었습니다— "제가 아는 걸 다 말씀드리죠. 나흘 전 핀처스 골목에 있는 해어 앤 하운즈(토끼와 사냥개라는 뜻의 선술집)에서 블록섬이라는 사람이 하는 말을 들었어요. 자기랑 동료가 퍼플리트(카팩스가 있는 지역)에 있는 낡은 집에서 아주 먼지투성이 일을 했다더라고요. 그런 일이 흔치 않으니까, 샘 블록섬이라면 뭔가 아는 게 있을 겁니다." 나는 그를 어디서 찾을 수 있는지 물었습니다. 주소만 알아다 주면 10실링 금화를 하나 더 주겠다고도 했죠. 그러자 그는 남은 차를 꿀꺽 삼키고는 당장 찾아보겠다며 일어섰습니다. 문간에서 그는 멈춰 서서 이렇게 말했습니다. —

"이보쇼, 나리. 여기서 무작정 기다려봐야 소용없소. 내가 샘을 금방 찾을 수도 있고 못 찾을 수도 있지만, 어쨌든 오늘 밤엔 그 친구가 멀쩡히 대답할 상태가 아닐 거요. 샘은 한 번 술을 마시기 시작하면 끝을 보는 녀석이거든요. 우표를 붙인 편지봉투에 나리 주소를 적어 주시면, 샘이 있는 곳을 알아내서 오늘 밤에 부쳐드리리다. 하지만 내일 아침엔 일찍 일어나서 찾아가 보셔야 할 거요. 안 그러면 그 친구를 못 만날 테니까. 샘은 전날 밤에 아무리 술을 퍼마셔도 다음 날 아주 일찍 일터로 나가거든요."

이것이 가장 현실적인 방법이었으므로, 스몰렛의 아이들 중 한 명에게 1페니를 주어 편지봉투와 종이 한 장을 사 오게 하고 거스름돈은 가지라고 했습니다. 아이가 돌아오자 나는 봉투에 내 주소를 적고 우표를 붙였습니다. 스몰렛이 주소를 알아내면 꼭 편지를 보내겠다고 굳게 약속한 뒤, 나는 집으로 발길을 돌렸습니다. 어쨌든 우리는 단서를 잡은 셈입니다. 오늘 밤은 너무 피곤해서 빨리 자고 싶습니다. 미나는 깊이 잠들어 있는데, 얼굴이 너무 창백해 보입니다. 눈을 보니 울었던 것 같습니다. 가엾은 내 사랑. 모든 상황을 비밀로 하는 것 때문에 틀림없이 괴로워하고 있을 테고, 아마 나와 다른 사람들을 이중으로 걱정하고 있을 겁니다. 하지만 이렇게 하는 것이 최선입니다. 지금 이렇게 실망하고 걱정하는 편이 나중에 신경이 쇠약해져 무너지는 것보다 낫습니다. 이 끔찍한 일에서 그녀를 철저히 배제해야 한다고 고집한 의사들의 판단은 전적으로 옳았습니다. 나는 단호해져야 합니다. 침묵이라는 이 무거운 짐은 오직 나 혼자 짊어져야 하니까요. 어떤 상황에서도 이 일에 대해서는 그녀에게 절대 말하지 않을 것입니다. 어쩌면 이게 그렇게 어려운 일이 아닐지도 모릅니다. 우리가 그녀에게 결정을 알린 후로, 그녀 스스로도 이 문제에 대해 말을 아끼고 백작이나 그의 행동에 대해 전혀 언급하지 않고 있기 때문입니다.

*       *       *       *       *

10월 2일, 저녁. —길고, 힘들고, 흥미진진한 하루였습니다. 첫 번째 우편 배달로 내 주소가 적힌 봉투를 받았습니다. 그 안에는 목수용 연필로 삐뚤빼뚤하게 휘갈겨 쓴 더러운 종잇조각이 들어 있었습니다. —

"샘 블록섬, 왈워스 바텔 가 포터스 코트 4번지 코크란스 숙소. 대리인을 찾으쇼."

한국어 번역(임시): I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to wake her, but that, when I should return from this new search, I would arrange for her going back to Exeter. I think she would be happier in our own home, with her daily tasks to interest her, than in being here amongst us and in ignorance. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment, and told him where I was off to, promising to come back and tell the rest so soon as I should have found out anything. I drove to Walworth and found, with some difficulty, Potter's Court. Mr. Smollet's spelling misled me, as I asked for Poter's Court instead of Potter's Court. However, when I had found the court, I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house. When I asked the man who came to the door for the "depite," he shook his head, and said: "I dunno 'im. There ain't no such a person 'ere; I never 'eard of 'im in all my bloomin' days. Don't believe there ain't nobody of that kind livin' ere or anywheres." I took out Smollet's letter, and as I read it it seemed to me that the lesson of the spelling of the name of the court might guide me. "What are you?" I asked.

한국어 번역(임시): "I'm the depity," he answered. I saw at once that I was on the right track; phonetic spelling had again misled me. A half-crown tip put the deputy's knowledge at my disposal, and I learned that Mr. Bloxam, who had slept off the remains of his beer on the previous night at Corcoran's, had left for his work at Poplar at five o'clock that morning. He could not tell me where the place of work was situated, but he had a vague idea that it was some kind of a "new-fangled ware'us"; and with this slender clue I had to start for Poplar. It was twelve o'clock before I got any satisfactory hint of such a building, and this I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner. One of these suggested that there was being erected at Cross Angel Street a new "cold storage" building; and as this suited the condition of a "new-fangled ware'us," I at once drove to it. An interview with a surly gatekeeper and a surlier foreman, both of whom were appeased with the coin of the realm, put me on the track of Bloxam; he was sent for on my suggesting that I was willing to pay his day's wages to his foreman for the privilege of asking him a few questions on a private matter. He was a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had promised to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me that he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in Piccadilly, and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes—"main heavy ones"—with a horse and cart hired by him for this purpose. I asked him if he could tell me the number of the house in Piccadilly, to which he replied:—

한국어 번역(임시): "Well, guv'nor, I forgits the number, but it was only a few doors from a big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. It was a dusty old 'ouse, too, though nothin' to the dustiness of the 'ouse we tooked the bloomin' boxes from."

한국어 번역(임시): "How did you get into the houses if they were both empty?"

한국어 번역(임시): "There was the old party what engaged me a-waitin' in the 'ouse at Purfleet. He 'elped me to lift the boxes and put them in the dray. Curse me, but he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller, with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder."

한국어 번역(임시): How this phrase thrilled through me!

한국어 번역(임시): "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow—an' I'm no chicken, neither."

한국어 번역(임시): "How did you get into the house in Piccadilly?" I asked.

한국어 번역(임시): "He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for when I rung of the bell he kem an' opened the door 'isself an' 'elped me to carry the boxes into the 'all."

한국어 번역(임시): "The whole nine?" I asked.

한국어 번역(임시): "Yus; there was five in the first load an' four in the second. It was main dry work, an' I don't so well remember 'ow I got 'ome." I interrupted him:—

한국어 번역(임시): "Were the boxes left in the hall?"

한국어 번역(임시): "Yus; it was a big 'all, an' there was nothin' else in it." I made one more attempt to further matters:—

한국어 번역(임시): "You didn't have any key?"

한국어 번역(임시): "Never used no key nor nothink. The old gent, he opened the door 'isself an' shut it again when I druv off. I don't remember the last time—but that was the beer."

한국어 번역(임시): "And you can't remember the number of the house?"

한국어 번역(임시): "No, sir. But ye needn't have no difficulty about that. It's a 'igh 'un with a stone front with a bow on it, an' 'igh steps up to the door. I know them steps, 'avin' 'ad to carry the boxes up with three loafers what come round to earn a copper. The old gent give them shillin's, an' they seein' they got so much, they wanted more; but 'e took one of them by the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot of them went away cussin'." I thought that with this description I could find the house, so, having paid my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was precious; for, now that he had achieved a certain amount of distribution, he could, by choosing his own time, complete the task unobserved. At Piccadilly Circus I discharged my cab, and walked westward; beyond the Junior Constitutional I came across the house described, and was satisfied that this was the next of the lairs arranged by Dracula. The house looked as though it had been long untenanted. The windows were encrusted with dust, and the shutters were up. All the framework was black with time, and from the iron the paint had mostly scaled away. It was evident that up to lately there had been a large notice-board in front of the balcony; it had, however, been roughly torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining. Behind the rails of the balcony I saw there were some loose boards, whose raw edges looked white. I would have given a good deal to have been able to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to the ownership of the house. I remembered my experience of the investigation and purchase of Carfax, and I could not but feel that if I could find the former owner there might be some means discovered of gaining access to the house.

한국어 번역(임시): There was at present nothing to be learned from the Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done; so I went round to the back to see if anything could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active, the Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around if they could tell me anything about the empty house. One of them said that he heard it had lately been taken, but he couldn't say from whom. He told me, however, that up to very lately there had been a notice-board of "For Sale" up, and that perhaps Mitchell, Sons, & Candy, the house agents, could tell me something, as he thought he remembered seeing the name of that firm on the board. I did not wish to seem too eager, or to let my informant know or guess too much, so, thanking him in the usual manner, I strolled away. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so I did not lose any time. Having learned the address of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy from a directory at the Berkeley, I was soon at their office in Sackville Street.

한국어 번역(임시): The gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in manner, but uncommunicative in equal proportion. Having once told me that the Piccadilly house—which throughout our interview he called a "mansion"—was sold, he considered my business as concluded. When I asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes a thought wider, and paused a few seconds before replying:—

한국어 번역(임시): "It is sold, sir."

한국어 번역(임시): "Pardon me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have a special reason for wishing to know who purchased it."

한국어 번역(임시): Again he paused longer, and raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold, sir," was again his laconic reply.

한국어 번역(임시): "Surely," I said, "you do not mind letting me know so much."

한국어 번역(임시): "But I do mind," he answered. "The affairs of their clients are absolutely safe in the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy." This was manifestly a prig of the first water, and there was no use arguing with him. I thought I had best meet him on his own ground, so I said:—

한국어 번역(임시): "Your clients, sir, are happy in having so resolute a guardian of their confidence. I am myself a professional man." Here I handed him my card. "In this instance I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on the part of Lord Godalming, who wishes to know something of the property which was, he understood, lately for sale." These words put a different complexion on affairs. He said:—

한국어 번역(임시): "I would like to oblige you if I could, Mr. Harker, and especially would I like to oblige his lordship. We once carried out a small matter of renting some chambers for him when he was the Honourable Arthur Holmwood. If you will let me have his lordship's address I will consult the House on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his lordship by to-night's post. It will be a pleasure if we can so far deviate from our rules as to give the required information to his lordship."

한국어 번역(임시): I wanted to secure a friend, and not to make an enemy, so I thanked him, gave the address at Dr. Seward's and came away. It was now dark, and I was tired and hungry. I got a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Company and came down to Purfleet by the next train.

한국어 번역(임시): I found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made a gallant effort to be bright and cheerful, it wrung my heart to think that I had had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of our grim task. She seems somehow more reconciled; or else the very subject seems to have become repugnant to her, for when any accidental allusion is made she actually shudders. I am glad we made our resolution in time, as with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge would be torture to her.

한국어 번역(임시): I could not tell the others of the day's discovery till we were alone; so after dinner—followed by a little music to save appearances even amongst ourselves—I took Mina to her room and left her to go to bed. The dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and clung to me as though she would detain me; but there was much to be talked of and I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no difference between us.

한국어 번역(임시): When I came down again I found the others all gathered round the fire in the study. In the train I had written my diary so far, and simply read it off to them as the best means of letting them get abreast of my own information; when I had finished Van Helsing said:—

한국어 번역(임시): "This has been a great day's work, friend Jonathan. Doubtless we are on the track of the missing boxes. If we find them all in that house, then our work is near the end. But if there be some missing, we must search until we find them. Then shall we make our final coup, and hunt the wretch to his real death." We all sat silent awhile and all at once Mr. Morris spoke:—

한국어 번역(임시): "Say! how are we going to get into that house?"

한국어 번역(임시): "We got into the other," answered Lord Godalming quickly.

한국어 번역(임시): "But, Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night and a walled park to protect us. It will be a mighty different thing to commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't see how we are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up and walked about the room. By-and-by he stopped and said, turning from one to another of us:—

한국어 번역(임시): "Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand—unless we can find the Count's key basket."

한국어 번역(임시): As nothing could well be done before morning, and as it would be at least advisable to wait till Lord Godalming should hear from Mitchell's, we decided not to take any active step before breakfast time. For a good while we sat and smoked, discussing the matter in its various lights and bearings; I took the opportunity of bringing this diary right up to the moment. I am very sleepy and shall go to bed....

한국어 번역(임시): Just a line. Mina sleeps soundly and her breathing is regular. Her forehead is puckered up into little wrinkles, as though she thinks even in her sleep. She is still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she did this morning. To-morrow will, I hope, mend all this; she will be herself at home in Exeter. Oh, but I am sleepy!

한국어 번역(임시): Dr. Seward's Diary.

한국어 번역(임시): 1 October.—I am puzzled afresh about Renfield. His moods change so rapidly that I find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they always mean something more than his own well-being, they form a more than interesting study. This morning, when I went to see him after his repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding destiny. He was, in fact, commanding destiny—subjectively. He did not really care for any of the things of mere earth; he was in the clouds and looked down on all the weaknesses and wants of us poor mortals. I thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I asked him:—

한국어 번역(임시): "What about the flies these times?" He smiled on me in quite a superior sort of way—such a smile as would have become the face of Malvolio—as he answered me:—

한국어 번역(임시): "The fly, my dear sir, has one striking feature; its wings are typical of the aërial powers of the psychic faculties. The ancients did well when they typified the soul as a butterfly!"

한국어 번역(임시): I thought I would push his analogy to its utmost logically, so I said quickly:—

한국어 번역(임시): "Oh, it is a soul you are after now, is it?" His madness foiled his reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face as, shaking his head with a decision which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:—

한국어 번역(임시): "Oh, no, oh no! I want no souls. Life is all I want." Here he brightened up; "I am pretty indifferent about it at present. Life is all right; I have all I want. You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to study zoöphagy!"

한국어 번역(임시): This puzzled me a little, so I drew him on:—

한국어 번역(임시): "Then you command life; you are a god, I suppose?" He smiled with an ineffably benign superiority.

한국어 번역(임시): "Oh no! Far be it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the Deity. I am not even concerned in His especially spiritual doings. If I may state my intellectual position I am, so far as concerns things purely terrestrial, somewhat in the position which Enoch occupied spiritually!" This was a poser to me. I could not at the moment recall Enoch's appositeness; so I had to ask a simple question, though I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the eyes of the lunatic:—

한국어 번역(임시): "And why with Enoch?"

한국어 번역(임시): "Because he walked with God." I could not see the analogy, but did not like to admit it; so I harked back to what he had denied:—

한국어 번역(임시): "So you don't care about life and you don't want souls. Why not?" I put my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him. The effort succeeded; for an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his old servile manner, bent low before me, and actually fawned upon me as he replied:—

한국어 번역(임시): "I don't want any souls, indeed, indeed! I don't. I couldn't use them if I had them; they would be no manner of use to me. I couldn't eat them or——" He suddenly stopped and the old cunning look spread over his face, like a wind-sweep on the surface of the water. "And doctor, as to life, what is it after all? When you've got all you require, and you know that you will never want, that is all. I have friends—good friends—like you, Dr. Seward"; this was said with a leer of inexpressible cunning. "I know that I shall never lack the means of life!"

한국어 번역(임시): I think that through the cloudiness of his insanity he saw some antagonism in me, for he at once fell back on the last refuge of such as he—a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that for the present it was useless to speak to him. He was sulky, and so I came away.

한국어 번역(임시): Later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not have come without special reason, but just at present I am so interested in him that I would gladly make an effort. Besides, I am glad to have anything to help to pass the time. Harker is out, following up clues; and so are Lord Godalming and Quincey. Van Helsing sits in my study poring over the record prepared by the Harkers; he seems to think that by accurate knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. He does not wish to be disturbed in the work, without cause. I would have taken him with me to see the patient, only I thought that after his last repulse he might not care to go again. There was also another reason: Renfield might not speak so freely before a third person as when he and I were alone.

한국어 번역(임시): I found him sitting out in the middle of the floor on his stool, a pose which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. When I came in, he said at once, as though the question had been waiting on his lips:—

한국어 번역(임시): "What about souls?" It was evident then that my surmise had been correct. Unconscious cerebration was doing its work, even with the lunatic. I determined to have the matter out. "What about them yourself?" I asked. He did not reply for a moment but looked all round him, and up and down, as though he expected to find some inspiration for an answer.

한국어 번역(임시): "I don't want any souls!" he said in a feeble, apologetic way. The matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I determined to use it—to "be cruel only to be kind." So I said:—

한국어 번역(임시): "You like life, and you want life?"

한국어 번역(임시): "Oh yes! but that is all right; you needn't worry about that!"

한국어 번역(임시): "But," I asked, "how are we to get the life without getting the soul also?" This seemed to puzzle him, so I followed it up:—

한국어 번역(임시): "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of thousands of flies and spiders and birds and cats buzzing and twittering and miauing all round you. You've got their lives, you know, and you must put up with their souls!" Something seemed to affect his imagination, for he put his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes, screwing them up tightly just as a small boy does when his face is being soaped. There was something pathetic in it that touched me; it also gave me a lesson, for it seemed that before me was a child—only a child, though the features were worn, and the stubble on the jaws was white. It was evident that he was undergoing some process of mental disturbance, and, knowing how his past moods had interpreted things seemingly foreign to himself, I thought I would enter into his mind as well as I could and go with him. The first step was to restore confidence, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he would hear me through his closed ears:—

한국어 번역(임시): "Would you like some sugar to get your flies round again?" He seemed to wake up all at once, and shook his head. With a laugh he replied:—

한국어 번역(임시): "Not much! flies are poor things, after all!" After a pause he added, "But I don't want their souls buzzing round me, all the same."

한국어 번역(임시): "Or spiders?" I went on.

한국어 번역(임시): "Blow spiders! What's the use of spiders? There isn't anything in them to eat or"—he stopped suddenly, as though reminded of a forbidden topic.

한국어 번역(임시): "So, so!" I thought to myself, "this is the second time he has suddenly stopped at the word 'drink'; what does it mean?" Renfield seemed himself aware of having made a lapse, for he hurried on, as though to distract my attention from it:—

한국어 번역(임시): "I don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'Rats and mice and such small deer,' as Shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the larder' they might be called. I'm past all that sort of nonsense. You might as well ask a man to eat molecules with a pair of chop-sticks, as to try to interest me about the lesser carnivora, when I know of what is before me."

한국어 번역(임시): "I see," I said. "You want big things that you can make your teeth meet in? How would you like to breakfast on elephant?"

한국어 번역(임시): "What ridiculous nonsense you are talking!" He was getting too wide awake, so I thought I would press him hard. "I wonder," I said reflectively, "what an elephant's soul is like!"

한국어 번역(임시): The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once fell from his high-horse and became a child again.

한국어 번역(임시): "I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a few moments he sat despondently. Suddenly he jumped to his feet, with his eyes blazing and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To hell with you and your souls!" he shouted. "Why do you plague me about souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already, without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I did so he became calm, and said apologetically:—

한국어 번역(임시): "Forgive me, Doctor; I forgot myself. You do not need any help. I am so worried in my mind that I am apt to be irritable. If you only knew the problem I have to face, and that I am working out, you would pity, and tolerate, and pardon me. Pray do not put me in a strait-waistcoat. I want to think and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am sure you will understand!" He had evidently self-control; so when the attendants came I told them not to mind, and they withdrew. Renfield watched them go; when the door was closed he said, with considerable dignity and sweetness:—

한국어 번역(임시): "Dr. Seward, you have been very considerate towards me. Believe me that I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it well to leave him in this mood, and so I came away. There is certainly something to ponder over in this man's state. Several points seem to make what the American interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get them in proper order. Here they are:—

한국어 번역(임시): Will not mention "drinking."

한국어 번역(임시): Fears the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything.

한국어 번역(임시): Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future.

한국어 번역(임시): Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls.

한국어 번역(임시): Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind that he will acquire some higher life. He dreads the consequence—the burden of a soul. Then it is a human life he looks to!

한국어 번역(임시): And the assurance—?

한국어 번역(임시): Merciful God! the Count has been to him, and there is some new scheme of terror afoot!

한국어 번역(임시): *       *       *       *       *

한국어 번역(임시): Later.—I went after my round to Van Helsing and told him my suspicion. He grew very grave; and, after thinking the matter over for a while asked me to take him to Renfield. I did so. As we came to the door we heard the lunatic within singing gaily, as he used to do in the time which now seems so long ago. When we entered we saw with amazement that he had spread out his sugar as of old; the flies, lethargic with the autumn, were beginning to buzz into the room. We tried to make him talk of the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not attend. He went on with his singing, just as though we had not been present. He had got a scrap of paper and was folding it into a note-book. We had to come away as ignorant as we went in.

한국어 번역(임시): His is a curious case indeed; we must watch him to-night.

한국어 번역(임시): Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalming.

한국어 번역(임시): "1 October.

한국어 번역(임시): "My Lord,

한국어 번역(임시): "We are at all times only too happy to meet your wishes. We beg, with regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the purchase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your Lordship will pardon us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever of him.

한국어 번역(임시): "We are, my Lord,

한국어 번역(임시): "Your Lordship's humble servants,

한국어 번역(임시): "MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY."

한국어 번역(임시): Dr. Seward's Diary.

한국어 번역(임시): 2 October.—I placed a man in the corridor last night, and told him to make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room, and gave him instructions that if there should be anything strange he was to call me. After dinner, when we had all gathered round the fire in the study—Mrs. Harker having gone to bed—we discussed the attempts and discoveries of the day. Harker was the only one who had any result, and we are in great hopes that his clue may be an important one.

한국어 번역(임시): Before going to bed I went round to the patient's room and looked in through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration.

한국어 번역(임시): This morning the man on duty reported to me that a little after midnight he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him if that was all; he replied that it was all he heard. There was something about his manner so suspicious that I asked him point blank if he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having "dozed" for a while. It is too bad that men cannot be trusted unless they are watched.

한국어 번역(임시): To-day Harker is out following up his clue, and Art and Quincey are looking after horses. Godalming thinks that it will be well to have horses always in readiness, for when we get the information which we seek there will be no time to lose. We must sterilise all the imported earth between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the Count at his weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is off to the British Museum looking up some authorities on ancient medicine. The old physicians took account of things which their followers do not accept, and the Professor is searching for witch and demon cures which may be useful to us later.

한국어 번역(임시): I sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to sanity in strait-waistcoats.

한국어 번역(임시): *       *       *       *       *

한국어 번역(임시): Later.—We have met again. We seem at last to be on the track, and our work of to-morrow may be the beginning of the end. I wonder if Renfield's quiet has anything to do with this. His moods have so followed the doings of the Count, that the coming destruction of the monster may be carried to him in some subtle way. If we could only get some hint as to what passed in his mind, between the time of my argument with him to-day and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a valuable clue. He is now seemingly quiet for a spell.... Is he?—— That wild yell seemed to come from his room....

한국어 번역(임시): *       *       *       *       *

한국어 번역(임시): The attendant came bursting into my room and told me that Renfield had somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he went to him found him lying on his face on the floor, all covered with blood. I must go at once....

