[P001] Chapter 20

[P002] Jonathan Harker's Journal

[P003a] October 1, Evening.—I visited Thomas Snelling's house in Bethnal Green, a slum in the East End of London. Unfortunately, he was not in his right mind. Before I even gave him any money, he had already started drinking heavily, too excited at the thought of beer. Fortunately, his very kind-looking wife gave me some important information. Her husband was just an assistant to a man named Smollet, who was the real person in charge. I immediately took a carriage and rushed to Walworth in South London, where I found Mr. Joseph Smollet.

[P003b] He was staying at home in his shirt sleeves, having late tea. Polite and intelligent-looking, he seemed like the model of a hard-working and reliable laborer, and a man with his own firm thoughts. Furthermore, he remembered everything about the boxes. He took a worn-out old notebook from his back pocket and read out the destination of the boxes, tracing the half-erased pencil marks. He said that of the one cartload brought from Carfax, six boxes were dropped off at 197 Chicksand Street in Mile End New Town, and the remaining six at Jamaica Lane in Bermondsey.

[P003c] If the Count intends to scatter his hiding places all over London, these must be the first stops before full-scale expansion. Seeing him move so meticulously, it is clear he does not plan to stay in just two places. He has now established strongholds in the east end of the north side, the east of the south side, and due south, based on the River Thames. There is no way the north and west of London are left out of his devilish plan.

[P003d] This is especially true for the bustling downtown area or the wealthy neighborhoods in the southwest and west. I looked at Smollet and asked if he had ever taken any other boxes from Carfax.

[P003e] He answered.—

[P004_005] "Since you paid me so generously, sir, I will tell you everything I know." I gave him a ten-shilling gold coin. "Four days ago, at the 'Hare and Hounds' pub in Pincher's Alley, I heard a fellow named Bloxam talking. He said he and his mate did some very dusty work at an old house in Purfleet. Since that kind of work isn't common, Sam Bloxam surely knows something." I promised to give him another ten-shilling coin if he just got me the address and asked where I could find him.

[P005b] Then he gulped down the rest of his tea and jumped up, saying he would go look right away. As he was about to leave, he stopped and added.—

[P006] "Look here, sir, you don't need to just wait around here. I don't know if I can find Sam right away, and even if I do, he won't be in any state to give a proper answer tonight. Once Sam touches alcohol, he drinks until the end. If you write your address on an envelope with a stamp, I will find out where Sam is and post it to you by tonight. But you will have to go and see him early tomorrow morning. Otherwise, you will miss him.

[P007_012] No matter how much alcohol Sam drinks the night before, he never fails to go to work at the crack of dawn the next day."

[P012b] His words made sense. I gave one of his children a penny to go buy an envelope and paper, and told the child to keep the change. When the child returned, I wrote my address on the envelope and put a stamp on it. Smollet repeatedly promised to send the letter as soon as he found out the address, and I headed home. Still, I have one clue now. Tonight, I am very tired and just want to get some sleep.

[P012c] Mina is sleeping deeply, but she is pale, and her eyes are puffy as if she had been crying a lot. My poor love. She must be suffering from the fact that she has been left out of all this, and her worries for me and the others have probably doubled. But this is the best for all of us. It is much better for her to be disappointed and worried for a while now than to completely break down from a severe nervous breakdown later.

[P012d] The doctors were absolutely right when they stressed that she must be completely separated from this terrible nightmare. I must brace myself, too. This heavy secret is a burden I must bear alone. Whatever happens in the future, I will never speak of it to her. Perhaps it might be easier that way. Ever since we informed her of our decision, she has kept her mouth shut about this matter and hasn't mentioned a single word about the Count or his atrocities.

[P012e] *       *       *       *       *

[P012f] October 2, Evening.—It was a long and exhausting, but quite exciting day. With the first post in the morning, an envelope with my address arrived. Inside was a grubby piece of paper with scribbles written crookedly with a carpenter's pencil.—

[P012g] "Sam Bloxam. Cochran's Lodgings, 4 Potter's Court, Bartell Street, Walworth. Ask for the deputy."

[P012h] Receiving the letter in bed, I got up quietly so as not to wake Mina. My wife looked heavy and sleepy, and she was very pale, not looking well at all. I decided not to wake her, resolving that when I returned from this new investigation, I would prepare to send Mina back to Exeter. Rather than being stuck between us without knowing anything, it would be much happier for her to return to our home and take care of daily routines. I met Dr.

[P012i] Seward briefly to tell him where I was going, and promised to come back and tell him everything as soon as I found a clue. Taking a carriage to Walworth, I found Potter's Court after many twists and turns. It was because Mr. Smollet had misspelled it, and I was asking for 'Poter's Court' instead of 'Potter's Court'. But once I found the alley, finding Cochran's Lodgings was a piece of cake. When I asked the man who answered the door for the deputy, he shook his head and said, "I don't know anyone like that.

[P012j] Nobody like that lives here. It's the first time I've heard that name in my life. I don't think there's anyone like that around here." I took out Smollet's letter again and recalled how I had misread the alley name earlier. Could I be confused again because of the spelling? "Who are you?" I asked.

[P013_019] "I am the manager of the lodging house," he answered. I realized right away that I had come to the right place. Once again, the terrible phonetic spelling had deceived me. When I slipped a half-crown coin into his hand, the manager opened his mouth. Mr. Bloxam, who had fallen asleep drunk on beer at Cochran's Lodgings last night, went out to work in the Poplar area at 5 a.m. today. He didn't know exactly where he worked, but I got a faint clue that it was some kind of 'newfangled warehouse'.

[P019b] I had to set off for Poplar holding only this meager clue. It wasn't until noon that I was able to get plausible information about such a building, at a coffee shop where laborers who were eating lunch had gathered. One of them tipped me off that a new 'cold storage' was being built on Cross Angel Street, and since it perfectly matched the words 'newfangled warehouse', I drove my carriage there without delay. When I gave them money, the gruff gatekeeper and the even crustier foreman became compliant.

[P019c] They guided me to Bloxam, and when I offered to pay the foreman his daily wage in exchange for asking Bloxam a few private questions, he gladly called him over. Bloxam was rough in his speech and manner, but he was quite quick-witted. When I promised a reward for information and gave him an advance, he confessed that he had traveled twice between Carfax and a house in Piccadilly. He had used a horse and cart he rented himself to move nine very heavy large boxes from that house.

[P019d] When I asked him for the street number of the house in Piccadilly, he answered like this.—

[P019e] "Well, sir. I've forgotten the street number, but it wasn't a few doors away from a big white church or something that was recently built. That place was also an old, dusty house, but it was better than the house where we took those damn boxes out."

[P019f] "If both houses were empty, how did you get inside?"

[P020_025] "An old gentleman who hired me was waiting at the Purfleet house. He helped me lift the boxes and load them onto the cart. Goodness, in all my life, I've never seen anyone with such brute strength. He was an old man with a white mustache, and he was so skinny I thought he wouldn't even cast a shadow."

[P025b] His words sent a chill down my spine!

[P026_027] "Well, the gentleman lifted the end of the box as easily as if it were a bundle of tea leaves. Even when I grunted and groaned, I could barely stand it upright. And I'm not one to be outdone in strength anywhere."

[P028a] "How did you get into the house in Piccadilly?" I asked.

[P028b] "He was there too. He must have left before me and arrived there first. As soon as I rang the bell, he opened the door himself and helped me move the boxes into the hallway."

[P028c] "All nine of them?"

[P028d] "Yes, sir. There were five in the first cart and four in the second cart. I was so thirsty that I hardly remember how I got home that day." I interrupted him.—

[P028e] "Did you just leave the boxes in the hallway?"

[P028f] "Yes, it was a spacious hallway, but there was nothing there." I tried to find out more details.—

[P028g] "Was there no key?"

[P028h] "I never used a key or anything. The old man opened the door himself, and closed the door when I drove the cart away. I don't remember the last time very well, but... ah, that must be because of the beer."

[P028i] "Do you really not remember the house number at all?"

[P028j] "Yes, sir. But it won't be too hard for you to find. It's a tall building with a stone front and bow windows, and there are high steps leading up to the door. I know it well because I carried boxes up those steps with three punks who were hanging around hoping to make a few pennies. When the old man gave them one shilling each, they must have thought they got a lot, and whined for more.

[P028k] Then the gentleman grabbed one of them by the shoulder and glared at them as if he was going to throw them down the stairs, and they all ran away grumbling." With this explanation, I felt I could easily find the house. I gave the friend who gave me the information a generous reward and headed to Piccadilly. I realized a very painful new fact. It had become clear that the Count could handle the boxes of earth himself. If so, time was running out.

[P029a] The Count, who had already scattered a significant amount of the boxes, could easily finish the rest of the work in a hurry without anyone knowing if he set his mind to it.

[P029b] After sending the carriage back at Piccadilly Circus, I walked west. After passing the Junior Constitutional Club, the house he described caught my eye, and I was convinced that this must be another hideout prepared by Dracula. The house looked as if it had been empty for a long time. The windows were covered with thick dust, and the shutters were firmly closed. The door frames were blackened with age, and the paint on the iron bars was almost completely peeled off.

[P030_035] It was clear that until recently, there had been a large 'For Sale' sign on the front of the balcony. Now it was roughly torn off, leaving only bare posts. Behind the balcony railing, a few loose planks with white edges stood out. If the sign had remained intact, I might have gotten a clue to find out who the owner of this house was, so it was a real pity. I recalled the experience of investigating and purchasing the Carfax estate.

[P036_040] A glimmer of hope arose that if I found out the previous owner, I might find a way to get inside this house.

[P040b] There was nothing more I could find out or do on the Piccadilly side right away. So I went around to the back of the house just in case I could find a useful clue. Most of the houses in Piccadilly were occupied, so the stables were quite busy. I asked some coachmen and assistants around the stables if they knew anything about the empty house. One of them said he had heard the house was sold recently, but he didn't know who bought it.

[P040c] However, he added that until recently, a 'For Sale' sign had been hung there, and he thought it had the name of a real estate agency called 'Mitchell, Sons & Candy' on it, so I might find out something if I went there. I didn't want to look too eager or reveal too much of my intentions to my informant. So I expressed my gratitude normally and left the place leisurely. Dusk was already falling and the autumn night was drawing in, so there was no time to delay.

[P040d] I found the address of 'Mitchell, Sons & Candy' in a directory at the Berkeley Hotel, and headed straight to their office on Sackville Street.

[P040e] The gentleman who greeted me had a very gentle manner, but his mouth was just as tightly shut. From the moment he told me that the house in Piccadilly (he called it a 'mansion' throughout the conversation) had already been sold, he seemed to think my business was finished. When I asked who bought it, he opened his eyes a little wide, paused for a few seconds, and answered.—

[P040f] "It is already sold, sir."

[P041_044] "Excuse me," I said just as politely. "I have a special reason why I must know who bought it."

[P044b] He was silent for longer than before and raised his eyebrows high. "I told you it is already sold." He answered bluntly again.

[P044c] "Look here," I said. "You could at least tell me that much."

[P044d] "No," he answered. "Mitchell, Sons & Candy strictly keeps our clients' secrets." This person was clearly a stubborn old man, and it seemed useless to argue with him anymore. Thinking it best to deal with him in his own way, I said this.—

[P044e] "From the clients' point of view, it must be very fortunate to have an agent like you who firmly keeps their trust. I am also a professional." Here I handed him my business card. "This is not out of mere curiosity. I am here as a representative of Lord Godalming. Lord Godalming wishes to know about the property that was recently put up for sale." At these words, the atmosphere changed completely. He said.—

[P044f] "I wish I could help you, Mr. Harker. Especially for Lord Godalming, I would be more than happy to help. When Lord Godalming was Arthur Holmwood, MP, we once rented a room for him. If you give me Lord Godalming's address, I will consult with our head office on this matter and contact him by mail tonight. It would be a great pleasure for us to provide Lord Godalming with the information he desires, even if we have to make an exception to our rules."

[P044g] I wanted to secure an ally rather than make an enemy. So I thanked him, left Dr. Seward's house address, and walked out. It was already dark outside, and I was very tired and hungry. After having a cup of tea at the Aerated Bread Company (A.B.C.) bakery, I took the next train down to Purfleet.

[P044h] Everyone was gathered at the house. Mina looked tired and pale, but bravely tried to appear bright and cheerful. My heart broke at the thought that I had to hide something from her and that it was making her anxious. Thank God. Tonight will be the last time she will be hurt by our attitude of watching our meetings and confiding nothing. I had to summon all my courage to maintain the wise decision to exclude her from this terrible affair. Somehow she seemed to have braced herself, or perhaps she had come to feel disgust for the subject itself.

[P045_046] Because she shuddered whenever a story related to the matter came up inadvertently. In this situation, it would have been a terrible torture for her every time we found out more facts, so it was very fortunate that we made such a decision in time.

[P047_049] Until we were left alone, I couldn't tell the others what I had found out today. So after dinner—and after listening to some light music so as not to show it even among ourselves—I took Mina to her room and laid her down. My lovely wife acted much more affectionately than usual, clinging to me as if to keep me there. But there was so much to talk about that I had to leave the room. I thank God that even though we have something to hide, our relationship has not drifted apart at all.

[P049b] When I went back downstairs, the others were all gathered around the fireplace in the study. I had written down the events so far in my journal while riding the train, and I read my journal exactly as it was to share the information I had found with everyone as quickly and accurately as possible. When I finished reading my journal, Professor Van Helsing said.—

[P049c] "You have done a great job today, friend Jonathan. You have surely found the trail of the missing boxes. If we find all the boxes in that house, our work is almost over. But if even one is empty, we must keep tracking until we find them all. Then we strike our final blow, and drive that devilish beast to true death." We were all silent for a moment, when Mr. Morris suddenly spoke up.—

[P050_054] "Look here! How do you plan to get inside that house?"

[P054b] "We got in at Carfax," Lord Godalming quickly answered.

[P054c] "But Arthur, this time is different. When we trespassed into Carfax, the darkness and the walled garden hid us, but breaking into an empty house in the middle of Piccadilly, whether in broad daylight or the middle of the night, is on a different level. Honestly, unless that real estate agent finds a key for us, I don't know how we can get inside. You might find out something when you receive the letter tomorrow morning." Lord Godalming frowned and got up from his seat, pacing around the room. Eventually, he stopped, looked at us one by one, and said.—

[P054d] "Quincey is right. This trespassing business is more serious than I thought. We got away with it once, but unless we find the Count's entire bunch of keys, this will be a real headache this time."

[P054e] Since there was nothing we could really do until morning, and it seemed wise to wait for a letter to Lord Godalming from the Mitchell agency, we decided not to take any active action until breakfast time. We sat for a long time, smoking and discussing the matter in various ways, and I took the opportunity to finish writing the events in my journal. I am so sleepy, I must go to bed now....

[P054f] I add a few short words. Mina is sleeping deeply, her breathing even. Even in her sleep, she seems lost in thought, with slight wrinkles on her forehead. She is still pale, but she doesn't look as haggard as she did this morning. I hope everything gets better tomorrow. Once she returns to our home in Exeter, she will return to her original bright self. Ah, I'm really sleepy!

[P055_057] Dr. Seward's Diary.

[P057b] October 1.—Renfield is causing confusion again. His mood changes so quickly that it's impossible to grasp. Moreover, his emotional shifts go beyond merely whether he is healthy or not, and always contain some meaning, so there is no more interesting subject of study than this. When I went to see him this morning after sending Professor Van Helsing away, he showed an attitude like a man who controls destiny. Indeed, he was controlling destiny—at least in his subjective world. He paid no attention to the trivial things of the earth.

[P057c] He soared above the clouds, looking down on all the weaknesses and deficiencies of us poor humans. I thought I should take this opportunity to find out something and asked him.—

[P058_061] "How are the flies these days?" He smiled at me with a very arrogant expression—the kind of smile that would suit Malvolio's face—and answered.—

[P061b] "Sir, flies have one outstanding characteristic. Their wings symbolize the power of flight possessed by mental faculties. It was a truly excellent choice for the ancients to depict the soul as a butterfly!"

[P061c] I decided to push his metaphor logically to the end and quickly said.—

[P061d] "Aha, so what you are aiming for now is souls, right?" Whether his madness suppressed his reason, a look of bewilderment spread across his face. He shook his head with a firm expression that I had rarely seen from him and said.—

[P061e] "Oh, no, absolutely not! I have no need for souls. All I want is life itself." Here his face brightened. "Actually, I'm not that interested in it right now. Life is fine too, since I have everything I wanted. If you want to continue studying the phenomenon of eating animals alive (zoöphagy), you'll have to find a new patient, sir!"

[P061f] A little confused by his words, I gently probed him.—

[P061g] "So you're saying you control life. Are you God?" He smiled an indescribably merciful and superior smile.

[P061h] "Oh, no! I have no intention of daring to claim the attributes of God as my own. I have no interest in His special spiritual activities either. If I had to explain my intellectual level, at least regarding these purely secular matters, I would say it's somewhat similar to the position Enoch held in a spiritual aspect!" It was too difficult for me. At that moment, I couldn't remember who Enoch was. Even knowing that asking such a simple question would make me look infinitely stupid in the eyes of this lunatic, I had to ask.—

[P061i] "Why do you say you are similar to Enoch?"

[P061j] "Because he walked with God." I couldn't find any similarity between the two, but not wanting to admit it, I returned to the topic he had just denied.—

[P061k] "So you're not interested in life and don't want souls? Why is that?" I asked the question quickly and in a slightly strict tone, intending to embarrass him. My intention hit the mark. He instantly reverted to his former obsequious attitude, lying flat before me, and answered flatteringly as if he really meant it.—

[P061l] "Really, I really don't need souls! It's true. Even if I had a soul, it's useless. It's of no use to me. I can't eat it, or——" He suddenly stopped talking, and a characteristic sly expression spread across his face like the wind blowing over the surface of the water. "And sir, what is life anyway? If you have everything you want and know that you lack nothing anymore, isn't that everything? I have friends—good friends like you." He added with an unspeakably sly sideways glance, "Because I know I will never lack the means to sustain my life!"

[P062] It seemed hostility towards me flashed beyond his crazy, cloudy eyes. He immediately sank into a stubborn silence, the last refuge chosen by his kind. I watched him for a while, but realized it was useless to talk to him right now. He was sulking completely, and I left the room as he was.

[P063] Late that afternoon, he called for me. Normally I wouldn't have gone without a special reason, but since I was so interested in him right now, I decided to gladly go. Besides, I was glad just to have something to pass the time. Harker had gone out chasing clues, and so had Lord Godalming and Quincey. Professor Van Helsing is holed up in my study, staring intently at the records compiled by the Harkers. He firmly believes that he can find a clue if he grasps all the details accurately.

[P064_070] The Professor did not want to be disturbed, and I didn't want to disturb him for no reason. I wanted to take the Professor with me when going to see the patient, but since I was coldly rejected last time, I thought he might not want to go again. There was another reason. I thought Renfield would open up his heart much more freely when he was alone with me than when a third party was present.

[P070b] He was sitting in a chair in the middle of the room, which usually meant he was mentally quite active. As I entered the room, he immediately asked, as if waiting for the question to pop out of his mouth.—

[P070c] "What happens to souls?" I must have guessed correctly. The unconscious thinking process was still going on in the lunatic's brain. I made up my mind to dig into this matter to the end. "What do you think?" I asked. He didn't answer immediately but looked around as if to find inspiration for an answer.

[P070d] "I don't want souls!" he said in a fading voice, as if making an excuse. The problem was clearly troubling his mind, so I decided to 'be cruel to be kind' and take advantage of his psychology. So I said this.—

[P070e] "You like life, and you want life, right?"

[P070f] "Oh, yes! But it's okay. You don't need to worry!"

[P070g] "But is there a way to gain only life and leave out souls?" At this question, he was visibly panicked. I didn't give him a chance and kept pushing him.—

[P070h] "It will be quite a sight when you fly out there later. The souls of thousands of flies, spiders, birds, and cats will be buzzing, chirping, and meowing as they fly around you. You took their lives, so you will have to bear all those souls!" Perhaps my words stimulated his imagination, as he plugged his ears with his fingers and squeezed his eyes shut tight, like a child closing his eyes tightly for fear of getting soapy water in them when washing his face. The sight was somehow pitiful and made my heart ache.

[P070i] At the same time, it gave me a realization. The person in front of me was just a child—just a child despite the wrinkled face and white beard on his chin. It seemed clear that he was experiencing some mental confusion. Recalling how his past mood swings had accepted such unfamiliar situations, I decided to do my best to enter his mind and go with him. The first step was to restore trust. So I asked in a rather loud voice so that his blocked ears could hear.—

[P071] "Shall I give you some sugar so the flies can gather again?" He shook his head, startled like someone waking from sleep. He answered with a hollow laugh.—

[P072] "Not really! Flies are worthless things after all!" After a moment he added. "Anyway, I hate their souls buzzing around me."

[P073] "Then how about spiders?" I continued to ask.

[P074] "To hell with spiders! What use are spiders? There's nothing to eat, or—" He suddenly stopped talking as if a forbidden topic had come to mind.

[P075] 'Right!' I cheered inwardly. "This is the second time he has suddenly stopped talking in front of the word 'drink'. What does it mean?" Renfield also seemed to realize that he had made a slip of the tongue, and quickly continued speaking, as if trying to divert my attention.—

[P076] "I have no interest in such trivial things at all. As Shakespeare said, 'mice, and rats, and such small deer' kinds of things. You could call it 'chicken feed in the pantry'. I have graduated from all those petty things. I know what you expect from me, but trying to draw my attention with such petty carnivores is like eating molecules with chopsticks."

[P077] "I see," I said. "So you want something big and substantial that you can sink your teeth into? Then how about having an elephant for breakfast?"

[P078] "You are talking complete nonsense!" He was back in his right mind so much that I decided to push him a little harder. "I wonder what the soul of an elephant is like!" I said, pretending to be deep in thought.

[P079] It had the effect I wanted. He immediately abandoned his arrogant attitude and reverted to a child.

[P080a] "I don't want elephant souls, or any souls at all!" he yelled. He sat down for a moment as if in despair. Then he suddenly jumped up in a fiery rage, showing all the signs of severe brain excitement. "To hell with you and your damn souls!" he howled like a beast. "Why do you keep bothering me about souls? I'm already in agony, in pain, and going crazy, and you're planning to make me care about souls!" His hostility was so intense that I thought another murderous fit had started, so I blew my whistle.

[P080b] But the moment I blew the whistle, he calmed down like a lie, and said apologetically.—

[P081a] "Forgive me, sir. I lost my reason. You don't need to help me. I just couldn't hold back my anger because I had so many worries in my mind. If you knew what problem I'm facing, this terrible problem I'm desperately trying to solve, you would pity me, understand me, and forgive me. Please don't put a straitjacket on me. I need to think, and if my body is tied up, I can't think freely. I trust that you will understand!" He certainly seemed to have regained his self-control.

[P081b] So when the attendants rushed in, I instructed them not to worry and sent them away. Renfield watched them leave, and when the door closed, he spoke in a quite dignified and affable manner.—

[P082a] "Dr. Seward, you have been very generous to me. Thank you very, very much!" I thought it best to leave this mood unspoiled and left the room. There is certainly something to ponder deeply about this man's condition. There are a few clues that would make a 'scoop', as American reporters often say, if only I could put them together in the right order. The clues are as follows.—

[P082b] He never brings the word 'drink' to his lips.

[P083_084] He is extremely terrified by the thought of being burdened with the 'soul' of something.

[P085] He shows no signs of worrying about lacking 'life' in the future.

[P086] While he fears being plagued by the souls of trivial creatures, he completely despises the creatures themselves.

[P087] Considering all these clues logically, there is only one conclusion! He is convinced that he will attain some higher life. But he is terrified of the price that comes with it—that is, taking on souls. Then what he is aiming for is human life!

[P088_091] Then where did that conviction come from...?

[P091b] Merciful God! The Count must have visited him. Some new and terrible plot is underway!

[P091c] *       *       *       *       *

[P091d] Later that day.—After my rounds, I went to Professor Van Helsing and confided my suspicions to him. His expression grew very serious, and after thinking for a long time, he asked me to take him to Renfield. I did so. When we reached the door, we heard the lunatic singing happily inside the room, just like in the old days that felt like a distant past. To our surprise, upon entering the room, he was sprinkling sugar on the floor as he used to. The flies, sluggish from the autumn weather, began to buzz into the room.

[P091e] We tried to bring up the topic we had discussed earlier, but he pretended not to hear. He just kept singing his song as if there was no one in the room. He picked up a piece of paper and was folding it into the shape of a notebook. In the end, we had no choice but to leave the room without finding out anything, just as we had entered.

[P092] His symptoms are truly bizarre. I must keep a close watch on him tonight.

[P093] Letter from Mitchell, Sons & Candy to Lord Godalming.

[P094a] "October 1.

[P094b] "Dear Sir,

[P095_096] "We are always pleased to meet your wishes. Regarding your request conveyed through Mr. Harker, we provide the following information regarding the sale of the property at 347 Piccadilly. The original sellers were the executors of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The buyer was a foreign nobleman, Count de Ville, who handled the purchase himself, and the purchase price was paid—if you will excuse our somewhat vulgar expression—in 'cold hard cash'. Other than this fact, we know nothing about him.

[P097_098] "Your faithful servants,

[P099] "Mitchell, Sons & Candy."

[P100] Dr. Seward's Diary.

[P101] October 2.—Last night, I stationed a staff member in the hallway. I instructed him to record exactly any sound coming from Renfield's room, and to call me immediately if he noticed anything even slightly unusual. When we were all gathered around the fireplace in the study after dinner—Mrs. Harker had already gone to bed—we discussed the day's attempts and the newly discovered facts. Harker was the only one who had achieved any results, and we are desperately hoping that the clue he found will be an important lead.

[P102] Before going to bed, I went to the patient's room and looked inside through the observation window. He was fast asleep, and his chest was quietly rising and falling with regular breaths.

[P103] The staff member who stood guard this morning reported that shortly after midnight, the patient became restless and repeated his prayers quite loudly. When I asked if that was all, he answered that was all he heard. However, his attitude was somewhat suspicious, so I bluntly asked if he had dozed off. He denied falling asleep, but admitted that he had 'nodded off' for a moment. It is truly bitter that people cannot be trusted unless they are watched.

[P104a] Today Harker went out to continue tracking down the clues he found, and Arthur and Quincey went to get horses. Lord Godalming judged that once we got the information we were looking for, there would be no time to lose, so it would be better to have the horses ready to depart at any time. We must disinfect all the imported earth between sunrise and sunset. That way, we can catch the Count in his weakest state with nowhere to hide. Professor Van Helsing went to the British Museum to look up authoritative materials on ancient medicine.

[P104b] Because ancient doctors seriously dealt with things that later doctors did not recognize, the Professor is currently looking for secret remedies to expel witches or demons that might be useful to us later.

[P105a] I sometimes wonder if we have all gone mad, and if we will come to our senses in straitjackets.

[P105b] *       *       *       *       *

[P106_107] Later that day.—We met again. It seems we are finally on the right track after him. Perhaps tomorrow our work will mark the beginning of the end of this terrible situation. Could Renfield becoming quiet be somehow related to this matter? His emotional changes always followed the Count's actions, so the fact that the monster is soon to be destroyed might have been communicated to him through some subtle means.

[P107b] If I could get even a hint of what on earth was going on in his mind today after I argued with him and before he started catching flies again, it would be a really important clue. He seems quiet for a while now.... Or is he?—— That beastly shriek just now surely seemed to come from his room....

[P107c] *       *       *       *       *

[P108_109] The attendant rushed into my room and urgently told me that some accident seemed to have happened to Renfield. He said he ran over after hearing the shriek and found him lying on the floor with his face buried, covered in blood. I must go see at once....