--- RAW ---

[P012] “My Friend.--Welcome to the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting
     you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will
     start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo
     Pass my carriage will await you and will bring you to me. I trust
     that your journey from London has been a happy one, and that you
     will enjoy your stay in my beautiful land.

[P013] “Your friend,

[P014] “DRACULA.”

[P015] _4 May._--I found that my landlord had got a letter from the Count,
directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me; but on
making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and
pretended that he could not understand my German. This could not be
true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he
answered my questions exactly as if he did. He and his wife, the old
lady who had received me, looked at each other in a frightened sort of
way. He mumbled out that the money had been sent in a letter, and that
was all he knew. When I asked him if he knew Count Dracula, and could
tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed themselves,
and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply refused to speak
further. It was so near the time of starting that I had no time to ask
any one else, for it was all very mysterious and not by any means
comforting.

--- EN ---

[P013_015] May 4. I found out that the hotel owner had received a letter from the Count and had pre-booked the best seat on the stagecoach for me. But when I asked him for more details, he kept his mouth shut and pretended not to understand my German. This made no sense at all. Just moments before, he had been answering all my questions easily. He and his wife (the old woman who had greeted me) exchanged frightened looks. He mumbled that the letter only contained the money for the coach fare and that he knew nothing more.

--- KO ---

[P013_015] 5월 4일. 알고 보니 호텔 주인은 백작의 편지를 받고 역마차에서 가장 좋은 자리를 내게 미리 빼두었다. 하지만 내가 좀 더 자세히 캐묻자, 그는 꿀 먹은 벙어리처럼 입을 닫고 내 독일어를 못 알아듣는 척 연기했다. 어불성설이다. 조금 전까지만 해도 내 질문에 척척 대답하지 않았는가. 그와 그의 아내(나를 반겼던 그 노부인)는 겁에 질린 눈빛을 주고받았다. 그는 마차 삯이 든 편지를 받은 게 다라며 자기는 더 아는 게 없다고 웅얼거렸다.
