"Since the Count is from a mountain valley swarming with wolves, if we're unlucky, he might arrive in Varna before us and set a trap waiting for us. So we had better pack plenty of Winchester repeating rifles in our armory. When it comes to a place teeming with beasts, nothing is as useful as a Winchester. Arthur, do you remember when we were chased by a pack of starving wolves in Tobolsk in the old days? If we had just had one repeating rifle in each of our hands back then, the situation would have turned out very interesting!"

"Good idea!" Van Helsing nodded. "Let's make the weapons Winchesters. Quincey is always cool-headed, but when it's time to hunt beasts, even the look in his eyes changes. Wolves are a hundred times more dangerous to humans than armchair theories ruining science. By the way, there is nothing we can do here in London. Moreover, since none of us are familiar with the geography of Varna, how about we pack our bags and leave early? It's the same whether we sit around waiting here or there. If we diligently finish our preparations tonight and tomorrow morning, and if nothing happens, the four of us should be able to set off lightheartedly by tomorrow."

"The four of us?" Harker asked back, looking at us alternately with a puzzled face.

"Of course!" The Professor quickly stopped him. "You have to protect your wife, who is the apple of your eye!" Harker stayed silent for a moment like a mute who ate honey, and then stuttered in a hollow voice.

"Regarding that matter... let's talk again tomorrow morning. I need to discuss it with Mina." I thought it was the perfect timing for Van Helsing to warn Harker that he must never leak our plans to his wife, but he pretended not to hear. Feeling frustrated, I looked at him meaningfully and cleared my throat. However, instead of answering, he gently placed a finger on his lips and quickly turned his head away.

Jonathan Harker's Journal.

October 5, Afternoon.—For a long time after the meeting ended this morning, I couldn't think of anything. With the situation changing so suddenly, my mind was a tangled mess, and normal thinking was impossible. Mina's bombshell declaration that she would drop out of the strategy meeting threw me into deep agony. Since I couldn't grab her and demand an explanation, I just beat my frustrated chest and made guesses alone. I have no idea what the problem is. Moreover, seeing the others accept Mina's decision so obediently made me even more confused. Just a few days ago, didn't we firmly swear not to keep any secrets between us anymore? Mina is currently falling into a sweet nap, oblivious to the world like a child. A soft smile spreads across her lips, and her face sparkles with happiness. Oh, thank God. I am just grateful for the fact that she is still allowed such peaceful moments even in this terrible hell.



Later.—It is truly a strange night. I lost my soul watching Mina sleeping happily and soundly, and for the first time in my life, I was soaked in an emotion close to perfect happiness. Before long, the short autumn sun set and the whole world sank into deep darkness, and the silence hovering in the room heavily pressed down on my chest. Then suddenly Mina opened her eyes wide, looked up at me affectionately, and opened her mouth.

"Jonathan, promise me just one thing on your honor. It is a promise to me, but it is a holy promise made with God looking down on us. It is a promise you must never break, even if I fall at your feet crying tears of blood and beg you. Please promise me right now."

"Mina," I stuttered in panic. "How can you ask me to make such a frightening promise out of the blue? I might not have the right to do so."

"But honey," she said intensely, glaring at me with eyes burning fiercely like the North Star. "This is something I desperately want. And it is not a selfish request to save myself either. If you really can't trust me, you can run to Dr. Van Helsing and ask if what I'm saying is right. If he shakes his head saying no, then do as you wish. If the situation changes later and everyone agrees, you can withdraw the promise then."

"I understand. I will promise!" When I reluctantly nodded, she finally smiled happily as if she had the whole world. Even though to my eyes, that terrible red scar stamped on her forehead seemed to be gnawing away all her happiness. She said firmly.

"Promise me that you will never leak a single word to me about the operational plans made to cut off the Count's breath. Not just words, but you must absolutely never give hints through your eyes or actions either. As long as this disgusting brand is stamped on my forehead, you must keep it a secret unconditionally!" She pointed to her scar with a solemn face. Realizing that she was speaking sincerely, risking her life, I answered heavily.

"I swear!" And the moment I spat out those words, I felt a desperate feeling as if a giant, cold iron door had slammed shut between us.



Later, Midnight.—Mina was incredibly bright and cheerful all evening. She acted so cheerfully that all of us stealthily gained courage as if infected by her pleasant energy. It felt like the gloomy dark clouds that always weighed us down had completely cleared up and we could breathe much easier. We went to bed early. Mina is sleeping soundly like an angel right now. It is just amazing how she can fall asleep so peacefully even in this suffocating pain. It is something to thank God for. Because at least in her dreams, she can forget the terrible reality and rest comfortably. Just as her radiant smile melted my heart tonight, perhaps the sound of her peaceful breathing might cure my insomnia too. I should try closing my eyes once. Oh, please, if only I could fall into a deep, dreamless sleep for just one night.



October 6, Morning.—I feel like I got hit in the back of the head since morning. Mina shook me awake early at dawn, exactly the same time as yesterday, and out of nowhere, asked me to fetch Dr. Van Helsing. Thinking she was having another seizure and needed to be hypnotized like yesterday, I hurriedly ran to the Professor's room. He was waiting eagerly for such a call, seemingly having stayed up all night with his tie still tightly tied in his room. He had left his door slightly ajar to eavesdrop on the sound of our room door opening. He ran straight over without a second thought, and as soon as he entered our room, he asked Mina if he could call the other friends as well.