Letter from Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra.

(Unopened by Lucy.)

"September 17.

"To my dearest Lucy in the world, —

Report from Patrick Hennessey, M.D., M.R.C.S., to John Seward, M.D.

"September 20.

"Dear Doctor,—

"As per your request, I enclose a report on all the circumstances you entrusted to me. Regarding the patient Renfield, I have something to add. He had another fit. It almost turned into a terrible situation, but thank heavens there were no casualties. This afternoon, two laborers drove a transport wagon to the empty house adjacent to our hospital—the very place where, as you may remember, the patient fled and hid twice before. Perhaps it was their first time here, the men stopped the wagon in front of the hospital gate to ask the porter for directions. Having finished dinner, I was smoking and looking out the study window, and I saw one of them walking towards the hospital building. As he passed under the window of Renfield's room, the patient inside suddenly started screaming at the top of his lungs at him and pouring out all sorts of unspeakable curses. The man, who looked like a fairly decent person, tried to end it by retorting, 'Shut your mouth, you foul-mouthed beggar.' However, our patient jumped up and down wildly, claiming that the man was trying to rob and kill him, and that even if he had to be hanged for it, he would stop him himself. I opened the window and gestured to the man to ignore him. Only then did the man look around and realize he was in a mental hospital, click his tongue, and say. 'My God, sir. I shouldn't care what kind of nonsense a bloody mental hospital lunatic spouts. I just feel sorry for you and the director, sir, who have to live under the same roof with such beastly scoundrels.' Then he asked for directions very politely, and I told him the location of the empty house's gate. He left, leaving behind the threats and curses pouring from our patient. Renfield is usually a very polite person, and apart from violent fits, he had never caused a disturbance like this, so I went down to check what on earth had provoked him so much. Surprisingly, however, his face inside the room was very calm and affable. I discreetly brought up the commotion from earlier, but he rather tilted his head asking what I was talking about, and acted as if he had completely forgotten the incident, almost fooling even me. But unfortunately, that was just another proof showing his cunning. Less than 30 minutes later, he caused another incident. This time, he smashed the window of his room and ran madly towards the driveway. Thinking he had made up his mind with some scheme, I called the attendants and chased after him. The moment I saw the wagon from earlier, full of heavy wooden boxes, coming down the road from afar, my ominous premonition hit the mark. The two laborers were wiping off sweat with their faces flushed red, as if they had finished a hard day's work. Before I could even approach, the patient pounced on them like a beast, dragged one of the men on the wagon down to the ground, and blindly started bashing his head against the floor. If I hadn't torn him off at that very moment, he surely would have beaten the man to death on the spot. The other laborer on the wagon jumped down and mercilessly struck Renfield's head with a thick whip handle. Despite the terrible blow that felt like it would break bones, he didn't care and grabbed that man too, dragging us back and forth as if we were kittens, and fought madly against the three of us. As you know, I don't easily lose in terms of strength, and the two laborers were also burly men. At first, we too kept our mouths shut and held on tenaciously. But as we pinned him to the ground and the attendants rushed in to put a straitjacket on him, he started screaming and wailing. 'I will ruin everything! You can't rob me! I won't let you bleed me dry! I will fight for my master and Lord!' He endlessly poured out this incoherent nonsense. The process of dragging him back to the ward and locking him in an isolation room padded with soft walls was truly a continuation of hardships. Hardy, one of the attendants, broke his finger. I gave him first aid right away, so you don't need to worry too much.

"At first, the two laborers were furious, demanding immediate compensation for the damages, and jumped up and down saying they would impose every punishment the law allows. However, their fierce threats contained a pathetic excuse to cover up the shame that two strapping men were helplessly overpowered by a single skinny lunatic. They raised their voices saying that if they hadn't exhausted all their energy carrying heavy boxes, they would have knocked him down in a single blow. Furthermore, they made the excuse that their throats were burning dry due to the hard, dusty work, but they couldn't even use their strength because even the nearest tavern from the worksite was too far away. I saw right through their true intentions, offered them each a glass of strong, dark rum, and pressed a one-pound gold coin into each of their hands. Then, as if they were never angry, they let go of their anger and laughed heartily, saying that if it's a drink offered after meeting an 'awesomely good person' like the boss, they would be more than willing to fight an even worse lunatic. I wrote down the names and affiliations of the two men just in case. Their identities are as follows: Jack Smollet, living at George Road, The Dings, Rents, Great Walworth, and Thomas Snelling, living at Guide Court, Peter Pallis Row, Bethnal Green. Both belong to the Harris & Sons transport company located at Orange Masters Yard, Soho.

"I will report any unusual occurrences happening here without leaving anything out, and if an urgent matter arises, I will send a telegram immediately.

"Dear Doctor, I wish you peace.

"Faithful friend,

"Patrick Hennessey."

Letter from Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra.

(Unopened by Lucy.)

"September 18.

"To my dearest Lucy in the world, —

"A very tragic thing has happened to us. Mr. Hawkins suddenly passed away. Some people might think we wouldn't be so sad since we didn't share a single drop of blood. But because we genuinely followed him like a real father, it is a great shock to me, as if I lost my own father. Since I was born without even knowing my parents' faces, the death of that warm and sweet elder breaks my heart even more. Jonathan is extremely heartbroken. Having lost a wonderful person who was a strong pillar of support for him all his life, and who left him a massive inheritance on his final journey that ordinary people like us dare not even imagine, his sorrow must be great. But it's not just for that reason that Jonathan is having such a hard time. Such a massive sense of responsibility suddenly weighing down on his shoulders seems to make him very afraid and at a loss. He has suddenly lost his confidence and is shaken. I am trying my best to comfort my husband somehow, and my husband is also steeling his heart while looking at me. But every time the scars of those terrible memories from before seem to torment Jonathan like this, it breaks my heart so much. Oh, how the pure and strong nature of my husband, who thanks to Mr. Hawkins's grace was able to rise from a lowly clerk to a respectable master, somehow got wounded and broken by that terrifying incident! The heavens are truly indifferent. I'm so sorry to bring you such gloomy news at a time when you must be overflowing with happiness, my love. But Lucy, even though I'm trying hard to smile and pretend to be brave in front of Jonathan on the outside, on the inside I am burning up too. Without a single person by my side to openly lean on, I couldn't bear it without pouring this out to you like this. I have to go to London the day after tomorrow for the funeral, and my steps are already heavy. Poor Mr. Hawkins left a will saying he wanted to be buried next to his father. Since he had no family, Jonathan must naturally act as the chief mourner. Even if just for a few minutes, I will make time and rush to see you, my love. Sorry for only rambling on with gloomy stories. May all blessings be with you.

"Loving you,

"Mina Harker."