"'Keep quiet! If you make even a sound, I will grab him and smash his brains out right before your eyes.' I was so horrified and bewildered that I couldn't move or speak. He sneered, tightly gripped my shoulder with one hand, and exposed my neck with the other as he said, 'First, I must quench my thirst as a reward for my troubles. You had better stay still. This isn't the first time your veins have quenched my thirst, nor the second!' My mind went completely blank, and strangely enough, I didn't even have the thought of wanting to stop him. It seems to be one of the terrible curses that appear when the monster touches its victim. Oh, good God, look upon me! He brought his disgusting, foul-smelling lips to my neck!" Her husband groaned again. The woman looked at him with pity, as if he were the victim, squeezed his hand tightly, and continued speaking.

"As my strength completely drained away, I was in a half-fainting state. I don't know how long this horrific thing lasted. But it felt like a very long time passed before he removed those disgusting, despicable lips. I saw red blood dripping from the bastard's mouth!" That memory seemed to crush her once again, and if her husband had not supported her with his arm, she would have collapsed on the spot. With superhuman effort, she barely regained her composure and opened her mouth again.

"Then he mocked me and said, 'Yes, you too, like the others, tried to use your petty brain to stand against me. Saying you would help them hunt me and ruin my plans! Now you know to your bones what the consequences are for standing in my way, and they must have somewhat realized it already. Those fools should have used that petty strength to put out the fire that fell on their own feet. While they were playing little tricks against me—I, who have commanded empires, plotted schemes, and waged wars for hundreds of years before they were even born—I was laying landmines right under their feet. And you, whom they love the most, are now flesh of my flesh, blood of my blood, and like my own kin. For the time being, you will be my bountiful wine press, and later you will become my companion and helper. Someday you too will have your revenge. Because every single one of them, without exception, will attend to you. But right now, you must pay the price for what you have done. You played a part in hindering me, so now you must answer my call. When I command you in my mind to "Come!", you must cross land and sea to follow me. That is why I am doing this!' Leaving those words, the bastard roughly tore open his shirt and ripped open a vein on his own chest with his long, sharp fingernails. As the blood surged up, he firmly gripped both my hands with one hand to pin me down, and with his other hand, he grabbed the back of my neck and forcefully shoved my mouth into that wound. To either choke to death or drink that blood— Oh, good God! Good God! What have I done? I, who have tried to live a gentle and righteous life my whole life, what terrible sin could I have possibly committed to meet such a fate? God, have mercy on me! Look upon this pitiful soul in a crisis more terrible than death, and show mercy to those who cherish me!" Then she began to rub her lips frantically as if trying to wipe away filthy sewage.

While she told that chilling story, the eastern sky slowly began to brighten, and everything gradually revealed its form clearly. Harker sat silently without moving an inch. But as the story continued, an ashen shadow was cast over his face, and in the morning sunlight, that shadow grew deeper. Soon, as the first red light of the approaching dawn rose, his skin looked exceptionally darker and paler in contrast to his hair that had turned completely white.

We decided to take turns staying nearby so that we could run to the unhappy couple whenever they called, until we gathered together and made a plan on how to act going forward.

Of one thing I could be certain. In the massive trajectory of the sun shining brightly on the world today, it would never shine upon a place more miserable and tragic than this house.