[Chapter 18]

Reason gives both sides time to present their arguments. Reason even asks to delay the trial itself to have enough time to uncover the truth. Anger, on the other hand, is always in a hurry. Reason wants to make a fair decision, but anger only wants its decision to be seen as fair. Reason focuses completely on the problem at hand, but anger gets provoked by meaningless details floating around the case. Anger gets irritated by a confident look, a loud voice, blunt speech, flashy clothes, dramatic lawyers, or public popularity.

Anger sometimes sentences a person to be guilty just because it hates their lawyer. Even when the truth is right in front of its eyes, anger loves and defends its own mistakes. Anger hates having its mistakes revealed, and it thinks it is more honorable to stubbornly stick with a bad decision than to admit it was wrong and back down.

I am reminded of Gnaeus Piso. He was free from many vices, but he had a twisted personality and confused harshness with consistency. Consumed by anger, he ordered a soldier to be executed just because the soldier returned from leave without his companion. Piso jumped to the conclusion that the soldier must have murdered his friend since he failed to bring him back. The soldier begged for time to go look for his friend, but Piso refused.

The condemned soldier was dragged outside the camp and was just about to place his neck on the chopping block. At that moment, his missing companion suddenly appeared. The officer in charge of the execution ordered the guards to put away their swords. He took the innocent soldier, whose innocence had just been proven by fate, back to Piso. They returned escorted by a huge crowd of fellow soldiers cheering at the happy news.

Piso, blinded by anger, marched up to the judge's seat and ordered both of them to be executed. He ordered one to die because he had not killed anyone, and the other because he had not died. Nothing could be more shameful than this. Because one man was proven innocent, two men had to die.

Piso even added a third person. He ordered the execution of the officer who had brought the condemned soldier back alive. Because just one man was innocent, three men lined up to die in the same spot. Oh, how clever anger is at making up excuses for its own madness!

Piso said to the first man, "I order you to be executed because you have already been sentenced to death." To the second man, he said, "I order you to be executed because you are the reason your companion was sentenced to death." To the third man, he said, "I order you to be executed because you disobeyed your general's orders when you were told to execute a man." He made up three completely different crimes because he could not find a single real one.
