[Chapter 35]

You get incredibly offended when your slave, your freedman, your wife, or your client talks back to you. Then you turn around and complain that the country has lost its freedom, even though you have already destroyed all freedom inside your own house. If you ask a question and they stay silent, you accuse them of being stubbornly silent. Let them speak, let them be silent, and let them laugh. You might ask if they should really be allowed to do this in front of their master. But you should not see yourself as a master; you are simply the head of the household.

There is no need to shout or scream. There is no reason to call for a whip in the middle of dinner just because the slaves are talking, or because a large crowd of people is not as perfectly silent as an empty desert. You have ears, and they are not just meant to listen to sweet, perfectly harmonized musical notes. You are meant to hear laughter and weeping, sweet talk and arguments, joy and sorrow, the human voice, and the natural noises of animals. You miserable person! You should not tremble with rage over the noise of a slave, the clatter of metal, or the bang of a door. No matter how refined you think you are, you still have to listen to the thunder.

You can apply these exact same rules to your eyes. Your eyes will become just as easily offended if you train them poorly. People get completely shocked by a little dirt, a silver plate that isn't perfectly polished, or a pool of water that isn't crystal clear all the way to the bottom. Those same delicate eyes can only tolerate the most expensive marble that has just been freshly scrubbed. They refuse to look at any table unless the wood has a perfect pattern of veins. At home, they hate stepping on anything that isn't more expensive than gold. Yet, when they go outside, these same eyes calmly look at rough, muddy streets. They do not get upset when most of the people they meet are dressed in rags, or when the city walls are rotten, cracked, and uneven.

The only reason people are not bothered outside by the exact same sights that would enrage them at home is their own attitude. They choose to be calm and patient in one situation, but angry and critical in the other.
