[Chapter 8]
Since we do not know how to endure injuries, let us be careful not to get hurt in the first place. We should not spend our time with anxious or grumpy people, but with the calmest and most easygoing people we can find. Our habits naturally begin to look like the people we hang out with. Just as some physical diseases spread through contact, the bad habits of the mind are passed on to our neighbors. A heavy drinker will make even the people who criticize him acquire a taste for wine. A wild, partying crowd will eventually ruin the morals of even the most mentally healthy people if they are allowed to. Greed infects the people closest to it with its poison.

Virtue also works exactly the same way in the opposite direction, improving everyone it touches. When a person with weak principles hangs out with better people, it is just as beneficial as a sick person living in a warm, healthy climate. You will understand how much this method can achieve if you observe that even animals become tame when they live with us, and no animal stays wild after spending a long time around humans. All of a beast's savage nature softens and is gradually forgotten in a peaceful environment.

On top of this, remember that a person who lives with quiet people not only improves by following their example, but they also stop practicing their own bad habits because they find no reason to get angry. Therefore, it is a person's duty to avoid anyone they know will provoke their anger. These people come in many different forms and use various methods to get the same result. A proud person will offend you with their arrogance, a talkative person with their gossip, a shameless person with insults, a spiteful person with malice, a combative person with arguments, and a bragging liar with their vanity. You will not be able to stand being feared by a suspicious person, yielding to a stubborn person, or being ignored by an overly picky person.

Choose honest, good-natured, and calm people who will not provoke your anger and who will be patient with you. People who are willing to compromise, who are polite, and who have gentle personalities will be even more helpful—as long as they do not flatter you. Excessive flattery only annoys people with bad tempers. One of my friends was a truly good man, but he fell into anger so easily that flattering him was just as dangerous as cursing at him.

Caelius, the Roman orator, was known for having the worst temper. The story goes that he was once eating dinner in his room with a client who was exceptionally patient. The client had a very hard time trying to avoid arguing with him. The client decided that the best approach was to simply agree with whatever Caelius said and go along with him. But Caelius could not stand the submissive agreement and shouted, "Contradict me on something, just so we know there are two of us here!" Yet even he, who was angry because he had nothing to be angry at, quickly regained his composure because he had no one to fight with.

If we know that we naturally have a quick temper, let us specifically choose friends who will simply accept our words and expressions. They might cater to us and let us fall into the bad habit of never hearing what we do not want to hear. But it is a good thing to give our anger some rest and peace. Even the most difficult, rough-tempered person will become compliant if they are treated kindly. Just as patting an animal stops it from staying angry or scared, whenever an argument seems like it will last longer or get fiercer than usual, we should stop it in its early stages before it gathers strength. An argument feeds on itself as it goes on, trapping the people who get too deeply involved in it. It is much easier to just step back from a fight than to try to pull yourself out of it later.
