[Chapter 36]

As the Roman philosopher Sextius noted, some angry people have actually been helped by simply looking in a mirror. They were shocked by how completely their appearance had changed. It was as if they were brought face-to-face with a stranger and did not even recognize themselves. Yet, that reflection in the mirror only showed a tiny fraction of how truly ugly anger is. If the mind itself could somehow be put on display or seen through a window, we would be horrified to see how dark, stained, twisting, distorted, and swollen it really is. Even now, looking through the physical mask of skin, blood, and bones, the face of anger is incredibly ugly. Imagine how much worse it would look if the mind itself were fully exposed!

You might not believe that anyone was actually shocked out of their anger just by looking in a mirror. That makes sense, because by the time the person walked over to the mirror to check themselves, they had already begun to calm down. To a person completely lost in rage, the most beautiful face is a fierce, savage one—exactly the look they are trying to project. Instead, we should think about how many people anger has physically destroyed. Some have burst blood vessels from sheer heat and rage. Some have screamed so hard they vomited blood, or pushed so much fluid into their eyes that they damaged their vision, only to collapse in sickness once the fit of rage finally passed. There is no faster road to madness than anger. As a result, countless people have become permanently trapped in the frenzy of anger, and having lost their minds once, they never got them back. The great ancient Greek hero Ajax was driven mad by anger, and that madness eventually drove him to suicide. People who are completely insane with rage will scream to the gods to kill their children, plunge them into poverty, and destroy their families—and yet they will still swear they are not angry or crazy.

They become enemies to their best friends and true dangers to the people they love the most. They care nothing for laws unless those laws can be used to hurt someone else. They are blown away by the tiniest, most useless things, and they absolutely refuse to listen to advice or accept help from friends. They try to solve every problem with brute force, and they are always ready to fight with a sword or throw themselves onto one. The greatest of all evils, the monster that towers over all other vices, has completely taken them over. Other passions slowly creep into the mind over time, but the conquest of anger is sudden and total. More than that, anger forces all other passions to bow down to it. It conquers the most passionate love. People have driven swords through the bodies of those they loved, and murdered the very people they used to hold in their arms. Even greed, which is usually the most stubborn and persistent of all passions, is crushed beneath the feet of anger. Anger forces greed to waste carefully gathered wealth, or to pile up a house and all its belongings just to burn them down. Even ambitious people have thrown away the very titles and honors they valued the most, and have rejected high offices when they were finally offered. There is not a single passion in the world that anger does not absolutely rule.
