[Chapter 43]

Instead of living this way, you should gather up whatever is left of your short life and make it peaceful for yourself and for everyone else. You should make yourself loved by everyone while you are alive, and missed by everyone when you are gone. You should not try to break someone's pride just because they spoke to you disrespectfully. You should not use all your strength to crush someone who barks and snaps at you. They are just miserable, pathetic people who lash out at those who are better than them.

Master, you should not be angry with your slave. Slave, you should not be angry with your master. Client, you should not be angry with your patron. Patron, you should not be angry with your client. Just wait a little while. Look, here comes death. Death will make all of you exactly equal.

At the morning shows in the arena, we often see a bull and a bear tied together to fight. But after the winner tears the loser to pieces, the winner is also killed. We do the exact same thing. We tear apart the people around us, completely forgetting that the end is coming soon for both the winner and the loser.

Let us spend the little time we have left in peace and quiet. Let us make sure that no one hates us when we are dead. A violent argument is often stopped instantly when someone yells "Fire!" in the neighborhood. The sudden appearance of a wild beast will make a robber stop attacking a traveler. People do not have time to fight over petty problems when they are faced with a massive, overwhelming terror.

We have no business fighting and plotting revenge. You just want your enemy to die. Well, even if you sit perfectly still and do nothing, he is going to die anyway. You are wasting your energy trying to do something that nature is already going to do for you.

You might say, "I don't want to kill him! I just want to punish him by exiling him, ruining his reputation, or taking his money."

I can actually forgive a person who wants to deeply wound their enemy more easily than a person who just wants to give them a tiny blister. The person who wants to give a blister is not only bad, but petty. Whether you want to cause a massive punishment or a minor one, the time you spend torturing your victim or enjoying their pain is incredibly short.

This breath of life that we love so much will soon leave us. In the meantime, while we are still breathing and living among other humans, let us practice humanity. Let us not be a terror or a danger to anyone. Let us keep our tempers under control, even when we face losses, wrongs, insults, or sarcasm. Let us endure our short-lived troubles with greatness of mind. While we are busy worrying about what we are owed and stressing ourselves out, death will already be upon us.
