[Chapter 40]

To one type of person you might say, "Be careful, your anger is only giving pleasure to your enemies." To another type you might say, "Be careful. Getting angry will destroy your reputation for being a strong and noble person. I swear to you, I am personally disgusted by how they treated you, and I am incredibly upset about it. But we must wait for the right moment. He will pay for what he has done, rest assured. When the time is right, you will pay him back with interest."

Scolding someone when they are angry just adds fuel to the fire, because you are getting angry yourself. You must approach them from different angles and in a cooperative way. The only exception is if you are such a powerful person that you can crush their anger completely. The Emperor Augustus did exactly this when he was dining with Vedius Pollio. One of Pollio's slaves accidentally broke a crystal cup. Pollio immediately ordered the slave to be taken away and killed in a very cruel way: he ordered the boy to be thrown into a tank of giant lamprey eels that he kept on the property.

Everyone assumed he kept the eels as a luxurious pet, but he actually kept them out of sheer cruelty. The boy slipped out of the hands of the guards and threw himself at the emperor's feet. He didn't even ask to be saved; he just begged to die in a normal way, instead of being eaten alive. Augustus was horrified by this strange and brutal cruelty. He ordered the boy to be set free. Then, to punish Pollio, he ordered his guards to smash every single piece of crystal ware in the room, and he ordered the eel tank to be completely filled with dirt.

This was the right way for the emperor to correct his friend. He used his immense power perfectly. You are not so important that you can order people to be put to death at a dinner party using some bizarre torture method. A person should not have their guts torn out just because your cup is broken. You must think incredibly highly of yourself if you try to order an execution right in front of the emperor.
