[Chapter 2]

Next, if you look at the results of anger and the damage it leaves behind, you will see that no disaster has cost the human race so dearly. You will see murders and poisonings, endless accusations and counter-accusations, the ruining of cities, the fall of entire nations, and leaders being sold as slaves at auction. You will also see torches thrown onto roofs, and massive fires that do not just burn inside city walls but turn whole regions red with enemy flames.

Look at the foundations of once-great cities where barely a trace remains today. Those places were destroyed by anger. Look at the wastelands stretching for miles without a single person living there. Those places were also wiped out by anger. Think of the many leaders in history who met a terrible end. Anger stabbed one person in bed. It struck down another person who was protected by the sacred laws of hospitality. It tore another person to pieces right in the middle of a crowded public square, the forum. Anger caused one person to bleed to death at the hands of their own son. It forced another person to have their royal throat cut by a slave, and it caused yet another person to be nailed to a cross. And all of these are just the individual cases I have mentioned.

Think beyond the individuals targeted by anger, and consider the massive crowds cut down by the sword. Think of the public that was mercilessly slaughtered when soldiers were let loose. Imagine entire nations sentenced to die together in one massive ruin, treated as if they were people who had rejected or insulted our authority.

The public often gets irrationally angry at gladiators. They get furious and feel personally wronged if the fighters do not willingly accept death. The crowd feels they are being disrespected. Through their expressions, gestures, and excitement, they turn from simple spectators into actual enemies.

Not all of these feelings are true anger. Sometimes they are just an empty shell of anger. This is like children who fall down and then angrily hit the ground. They often do not even know why they are mad. On the outside, they act like they are hurt and want to punish someone, but they are just getting mad without any reason or real damage. They are fooled into thinking they were hit, they are easily calmed by fake tears asking for forgiveness, and they heal their fake injuries with fake revenge.
