[Chapter 11]

Our opponents argue, "Anger is useful because it helps us avoid being despised and frightens bad people."

First of all, if anger is as powerful as its threats, it becomes disgusting for the same reason it becomes frightening. It is far more dangerous to be hated than to be despised. On the other hand, if anger lacks real power, it is exposed to much more contempt and cannot avoid mockery. After all, nothing is more pathetic than anger when it explodes into meaningless outbursts.

Furthermore, just because things are somewhat frightening doesn't mean they are desirable. Wisdom does not want the fear that a wise person inspires to be described as their weapon, as if they were a wild beast. We fear fevers, gout, and flesh-eating ulcers, but there is no goodness in them. Instead, they are considered despicable, hateful, and vile, and they are feared for precisely this reason.

Similarly, anger is ugly by nature and should not be feared, yet many people fear it just as children fear an ugly mask. We cannot ignore the fact that fear always backfires on the person who caused it, and that a person who truly maintains tranquility of mind fears no one.

At this point, it is helpful to remember a line by the Roman playwright Laberius, which captivated the public when it was recited in the theater at the height of the civil wars: "He who is feared by many must himself fear many."

Nature (or Providence) has decreed that whatever becomes great by causing fear in others can never be free from fear itself. Look at how easily lions are startled by the faintest sound! Notice how the fiercest beasts get agitated by unfamiliar shadows, voices, or smells! Whatever is a terror to others fears for itself.

Therefore, no wise person has any reason to want to be an object of fear. You should not think that anger is something great just because it inspires terror. Even the most despicable things, like venomous pests, are feared. It is no surprise that a simple string tied with brightly colored feathers can stop a huge herd of wild animals and lead them into a trap; we even call it a 'threat'. Foolish creatures are scared of foolish things. The sight of a moving cart and turning wheels drives lions back into their cages, and elephants are terrified by the squeal of a pig. In the same way, we fear anger just as children fear the dark, or wild animals fear a red feather. Anger itself has no constancy or bravery at all. It only affects weak minds.
