[Chapter 12]

Our opponent argues that a good person should get angry if they see their father murdered or their mother attacked. However, in reality, a good person will not get angry. They will avenge them or protect them. You do not need to worry that devotion to one's family is not enough of a motive to act without anger. Arguing that is like claiming that when a good person sees their son or father fall, they will act like women who cry or faint just from hearing a tiny rumor of danger.

A good person will not panic or feel afraid. They will do their duty in a way that is right for a human being. If my father is in danger of being murdered, I will defend him. If he is already dead, I will avenge him. I will do this not out of blind grief, but because it is my duty.

Theophrastus argues that a good person gets angry when they see their friends getting hurt. Theophrastus, when you say this, you are trying to ruin noble principles. You are ignoring the reason that makes judgments and appealing directly to the emotions of the crowd. Since people naturally get angry when bad things happen to their friends, you assume the crowd will decide that acting out of anger is the right thing to do. People usually tend to think that the emotions they feel inside themselves are justified.

But people act exactly the same way when their hot water is not ready, when a glass breaks, or when mud splashes on their shoes. It is not devotion to family that creates this anger, but a weak mind. Children cry when they lose their parents, but they cry just as bitterly when they lose a toy.

Feeling anger on behalf of your friends does not show a heart full of love; it shows a weak heart. Standing up to protect your parents, your children, your friends, and your country is honorable and worthy of respect because it is your duty. You should do it of your own free will, with clear judgment and a vision for the future, not in a wild and impulsive frenzy.

No emotion is more anxious for revenge than anger, but for that very reason, anger is actually the worst at getting revenge. Like almost all extreme desires, anger is so rushed and frantic that it trips over its own feet trying to reach its goal. Therefore, anger has never been useful in peace or in war. Anger turns peace into war. When it picks up weapons, it forgets that the battlefield belongs to no one. Ultimately, because anger cannot control itself at all, it falls into the hands of the enemy.

Furthermore, just because something occasionally brought a useful result, you should not accept a bad habit. A fever might sometimes cure a specific illness, but it is much better not to catch a fever in the first place. Getting healthy thanks to a disease is a miserable cure. In the same way, just because a poison, a fall off a cliff, or surviving a shipwreck unexpectedly brought some benefit in the past, you should not consider it healthy. After all, even poison has proven to be good for health on very rare occasions.
