[Chapter 2]

You might ask where this inquiry leads. It leads to us knowing what anger is. If anger happens against our will, it will never yield to reason. All the movements that happen without our choice or will are beyond our control and unavoidable. For example, we shiver when cold water is poured over us, or shrink away when we are touched in certain places. People's hair stands on end at bad news, their faces blush at indecent words, and they feel dizzy when looking down a cliff. Just as we have no power to prevent these physical reactions, no logical reasoning can stop them from happening. But anger can be driven away by wise maxims. Anger is a voluntary flaw of the mind. It is not something that happens naturally due to the conditions of human life, which could happen even to the wisest person.

Among these uncontrollable things, the very first is the thrill of the mind that seizes us when we think about wrongdoing. We feel this even when watching a play on stage or reading about things that happened long ago. We often feel angry at Clodius, the corrupt Roman politician who banished the great orator Cicero, and at Antonius for murdering him. Everyone is outraged by the civil wars of Marius and the cruel purges of Sulla. Everyone is furious at Theodotus and Achillas, who assassinated the Roman general Pompey, and at the boy king of Egypt, Ptolemy, who dared to commit a terrible crime unsuited for a child. Sometimes songs, fast rhythms, and the martial sound of trumpets excite us. Shocking pictures or the terrible sight of someone being tortured, no matter how deserved the punishment, also affect our minds. This is why we smile when others are smiling, feel sad when we see a crowd of mourners, and take a passionate interest in other people's battles. Just as frowning at a shipwreck in a play is not true sadness, none of these feelings are true anger. What we feel when we read about the Carthaginian general Hannibal besieging the walls of Rome after the Battle of Cannae cannot be called fear. All of these are just simple reactions from a mind that is not yet fully stirred. They are not passions, but only the early stages that might grow into passions. It is like how a soldier, even in civilian clothes during profound peace, is startled by the sound of a trumpet, or how camp horses prick up their ears at the clash of weapons. It is even said that Alexander the Great instinctively laid his hand on his weapons when the musician Xenophantus was singing.
