[Chapter 39]

We have now successfully learned how to regulate our own minds, my friend Novatus. Our minds either do not feel anger at all, or they rise above it. Next, let us see how we can soothe the anger of other people. We want to not only be healthy ourselves, but also to heal others.

You should not try to calm the first explosion of anger with words. A fresh burst of anger is completely deaf and frantic. We have to give it some space. Our remedies will only work when the anger naturally starts to fade. We do not touch people's eyes when they are swollen, because rubbing them would only make the stiff swelling worse. We do not try to cure other diseases when they are at their absolute worst. In the very first stage of any illness, the best treatment is simply rest.

You might argue, "Your remedy is pretty useless if it only calms anger that is already dying down on its own."

First of all, my treatment makes the anger end much faster. Second, it prevents the anger from flaring up again. It can neutralize a violent impulse even when it is too dangerous to soothe directly. It removes any weapons that might be used for revenge. Sometimes, we even pretend to be angry so that our advice carries more weight, acting like a fellow sufferer who understands their pain. We invent delays and push back any immediate punishment while pretending to look for a harsher one. We use every trick possible to give the person a short break from their own frenzy.

If their anger is unusually strong, we might use an overwhelming sense of shame or fear to shock them out of it. If their anger is weak, we can talk about amusing or entirely new subjects. By playing on their curiosity, we can lead them to forget their rage. There is a story of a doctor who had to operate on a king's daughter. He knew he had to use a knife, so he hid a small blade under the sponge he was using to clean her swollen chest. The girl would have run away if she saw the knife, but she bore the pain because she never expected it. Sometimes, the only way to cure a disease is through a little trickery.
