[Chapter 26]

You might say, "I cannot endure it. Injuries are just too hard to bear." But that is a lie, because anyone who has the energy to be angry can certainly find the strength to bear an injury. You tolerate the crazy talk of a sick person, the rants of a madman, or the rude behavior of a child, because you know they don't really understand what they are doing. If a person is not responsible for their actions, it does not matter what specific problem caused it. Being ignorant is a valid excuse in all of these cases.

You might argue that the person must be punished. Do not worry, they will be punished, even if you do nothing. The greatest punishment for hurting someone is simply the realization of having done it. No one is punished more severely than the person who has to live with their own remorse. Next, we should look at the general state of humanity in order to judge the events of life fairly. It is simply unfair to blame one individual for a flaw that is shared by everyone.

The skin color of an Ethiopian does not stand out among their own people. No one in Germany is ashamed of tying up their red hair. You cannot call a trait strange or shameful in one person if it is a normal characteristic of their entire culture. The examples I just gave are customs limited to specific parts of the world. Now think about how much more we should forgive the flaws that are shared by all of humanity.

We are all hot-headed and careless. We are all unreliable, hard to satisfy, and overly ambitious. I am not going to hide our shared flaws by making excuses for them. We are all flawed. Because of this, each of us will eventually find the exact same flaw in our own heart that we are busy criticizing in someone else. When a plague is sweeping through a city, people do not stop to point out how pale or thin one specific person is. Therefore, let us be gentler with one another. We are all just flawed people living among other flawed people. The only way we can ever find peace is if we all agree to forgive each other.

You might say, "This person has already hurt me, and I haven't hurt them yet." That might be true right now, but you have probably hurt someone else in the past, and you will likely hurt this person eventually. Do not judge your entire character based on a single hour or a single day. Look at your overall tendencies. Even if you haven't done anything wrong yet, you are fully capable of doing it.
