[Chapter 27]

It is far better to heal an injury than to avenge it. Revenge takes up a lot of time, and while you are suffering from one injury, seeking revenge just exposes you to many more. We all hold onto our anger long after the actual pain of the hurt has faded. It would be a much better strategy to simply do the opposite, and not respond to one bad deed with another. If a mule kicked you or a dog bit you, no one would think you were completely sane if you kicked or bit them back.

You might argue, "But those animals don't know they are doing anything wrong." First of all, you are a very unfair judge if you are less willing to forgive a human than a beast. Secondly, if an animal is safe from your anger simply because it lacks reason, you should treat all foolish people exactly the same way. If a person suffers from the same kind of ignorance that excuses the bad behavior of a dumb animal, it does not matter if they look different from an animal.

They have sinned. This is probably not their first time, and it won't be their last. Even if they promise, "I will never do it again," you shouldn't believe them. They will sin again, and someone else will sin against them, and they will spend their entire life rolling around in bad behavior. We must meet cruelty with kindness. We should give an angry person the exact same advice that works so well for someone who is grieving. Tell them, "You will have to stop this eventually. Since you are going to stop someday, it is much better for you to walk away from your anger than to wait for your anger to walk away from you. This intense emotion will eventually fade. You need to realize what an exhausting life you are forcing upon yourself. A life spent constantly boiling over with rage is truly miserable."

Keep this in mind. Even if you work yourself into a rage and constantly look for new reasons to stay angry, that anger will eventually leave you on its own, and time will drain its power. It is far better for you to conquer your anger yourself than to wait for it to just burn itself out.
