[Chapter 3]

Our opponents might say that we often get angry not at people who have hurt us, but at people who are going to hurt us. Therefore, they argue, it is clear that anger does not always come from an injury we have already received.

It is true that we get angry at people who are going to hurt us. But they are already hurting us with their intentions alone. A person who plans to cause harm is already committing that harm.

Opponents might also argue that the weakest people often get angry at the most powerful people. So, they say, we can see that anger is not just a desire to punish an enemy, because people do not want to punish someone when they have no hope of succeeding.

First, I said that anger is a "desire" to punish, not the "actual ability" to do so. People often want things they cannot have. Second, no matter how low a person's position is, there is no one who cannot hope to punish even the greatest person. This is because we all have at least a little bit of power to cause harm to others.

Aristotle's definition is not much different from mine. He says anger is a desire to pay back suffering. It would take quite a bit of time to look closely at how his definition and mine are different. Someone might disagree with both of us and point out that wild animals get angry without being provoked by any injury, and without any thought of punishing another creature or paying them back with pain. Even if animals do act this way, it is not their actual goal.

However, we must admit that wild animals, and any other creature besides humans, cannot feel true anger. Anger is the enemy of reason, but it can never exist in a place where reason does not exist. Wild animals have impulses, fierceness, cruelty, and combativeness. But just as they do not know how to live in luxury, they do not know how to be angry either. This is true even though they chase some pleasures with less self-control than humans do.

Do not believe the poet who wrote that the boar forgot its anger, the deer forgot the hunting dogs, and the bear forgot how it leaped wildly among the herd. When a poet says an animal gets angry, it simply means the animal is excited or provoked. Just as animals do not know how to forgive, they do not know how to be angry.

Dumb animals do not have human emotions. They only have impulses that look like emotions. If animals could truly feel love and hate, they would also be able to share friendship, rivalry, agreement, and disagreement. Of course, animals do have tiny traces of these traits, but true virtues and vices exist only in the human mind. No creature except humans has been given wisdom, foresight, the ability to work hard, and the ability to think deeply.

Animals cannot reach human virtues, and in the same way, they cannot reach human vices. Their entire mental and physical makeup is completely different from ours. The principles that guide them come from a different source. For example, animals have voices, but they are unclear and cannot form words. They have tongues, but they are restricted and not quick enough to make complex movements. Also, they do have a kind of intelligence, which is the greatest trait, but it is rough and imprecise. They can grasp visions and ideas and put them into action, but only in a blurry and vague way.

For this reason, the impulses and outbursts of animals are violent. Animals do not feel true fear, anxiety, grief, or anger. They only feel something that looks similar to them. That is why animals quickly shake off these states and instantly switch to the exact opposite state. Right after showing intense rage and fear, they will peacefully graze on grass. And after frantically howling and thrashing around, they will immediately fall into a quiet sleep.
