The Man Who Desired Gold

Bansir, the chariot builder of Babylon, was completely discouraged. He sat on the low wall around his property and stared sadly at his simple home. Next to it was his open workshop, where a partially finished chariot sat.

His wife kept appearing at the open door. She shot quick glances his way. They were quiet reminders that their meal bag was almost empty. He knew he should be working. He needed to hammer and shape, polish and paint. He had to stretch the leather tightly over the wheel rims. The chariot had to be ready for delivery so he could finally get paid by his wealthy customer.

Even so, his thick, muscular body stayed firmly planted on the wall. His mind was slowly and patiently wrestling with a problem. He just could not find an answer. The hot tropical sun of the Euphrates valley beat down on him mercilessly. Beads of sweat formed on his forehead. They rolled down unnoticed, losing themselves in the thick hair on his chest.

Behind his home loomed the high, terraced wall around the king's palace. Close by, the painted tower of the Temple of Bel pierced the blue sky. His simple home sat right in the shadow of this greatness. So did many other homes, though most were far less neat and cared for. That was exactly what Babylon was like. It was a chaotic mix of greatness and squalor. Dazzling wealth lived right next to the deepest poverty. Everything was crammed together inside the city's protective walls, with no real plan or system.

If he had bothered to turn around, he would have seen the noisy chariots of the rich. They shoved their way through the streets, pushing aside sandal-wearing tradesmen and barefoot beggars alike. But even the rich had to pull into the gutters for the king's business. Long lines of enslaved water carriers marched past. Each one carried a heavy goatskin full of water, meant for the hanging gardens.

Bansir was too lost in his own thoughts to hear the chaotic noise of the busy city. But then, a familiar sound snapped him out of his daydream. It was the sudden twang of a lyre. He turned and saw the kind, smiling face of his best friend. It was Kobbi, the musician.

"May the Gods bless you generously, my good friend," Kobbi said with a grand bow. "Though it seems they have already been so generous that you do not even need to work. I am happy for your good fortune. In fact, I would love to share in it. Please, open that purse of yours. It must be bursting with coins, or you would be busy in your shop right now. Pull out just two simple shekels and lend them to me. I only need them until after the noblemen's feast tonight. You will not even miss them before I pay you back."

"If I actually had two shekels," Bansir replied gloomily, "I could not lend them to anyone. Not even to you, my best friend. Because those two shekels would be my entire fortune. Nobody lends out their entire fortune, not even to their closest friend."

"What?" Kobbi asked, completely surprised. "You do not have a single shekel in your purse, yet you sit here on a wall like a statue! Why do you not finish that chariot? How else will you feed that huge appetite of yours? This is not like you, my friend. Where is your endless energy? Is something bothering you? Have the Gods sent you trouble?"

"It must be a torment from the Gods," Bansir agreed. "It started with a dream. It was a crazy dream where I was a wealthy man. A handsome purse hung from my belt, and it was heavy with coins. I had plenty of shekels, and I tossed them freely to the beggars. I had pieces of silver, and I bought fancy clothes for my wife. I bought whatever I wanted for myself. And I had pieces of gold. That gold made me feel totally secure about the future, so I was not afraid to spend the silver. I felt an incredible sense of peace and happiness! You would not have even recognized your hardworking friend. And you would not have recognized my wife, either. Her face was completely free of wrinkles, just glowing with joy. She looked exactly like the smiling young woman from when we first got married."

"That is a wonderful dream," Kobbi said. "But why would such happy feelings turn you into a gloomy statue sitting on a wall?"

"I will tell you why! Because then I woke up. I remembered how empty my purse really was, and a massive wave of rebellion washed over me. Let us talk about this together. Like the sailors say, we are in the same boat. When we were young, we went to the priests together to learn wisdom. As young men, we shared the same fun and pleasures. As grown adults, we have always stayed close friends. We have always been happy, loyal subjects. We have been perfectly fine working long hours and spending whatever we earned right away. We have made a lot of coin over the years. Yet, to experience the actual joy of wealth, we have to rely on dreams. Bah! Are we just dumb sheep? We live in the richest city in the entire world. Travelers constantly say that no other place can match its wealth. There is so much money flashing all around us. But we have absolutely nothing to show for it ourselves. After half a lifetime of breaking your back with hard work, my best friend has an empty purse. You come to me and ask, 'Can I borrow a tiny amount like two shekels just until tonight?' And what do I say? Do I say, 'Here is my purse, I am happy to share?' No! I have to admit that my purse is just as completely empty as yours. What is wrong with us? Why can we not get our hands on silver and gold? Why can we not have more than just enough for basic food and clothing?"

"And think about our sons," Bansir continued. "Are they not following right in our footsteps? Do they really need to live their whole lives like this? Will their families, and their sons, and their sons' families have to live surrounded by all this gold? Will they have to settle for a banquet of sour goat's milk and plain porridge, just like us?"

"In all the years we have been friends, you have never talked like this before, Bansir." Kobbi was completely puzzled.

"In all those years, I never thought like this before. From the first light of dawn until it got too dark to see, I have worked. I have poured my sweat into building the finest chariots any man could make. I was foolishly hoping that someday the Gods would recognize my hard work and bless me with great wealth. But they never have. And I finally realize that they never will. That is why I am so sad. I want to be a wealthy man. I want to own my own lands and cattle. I want nice clothes and plenty of coins in my purse. I am perfectly willing to work hard for these things. I will use all the strength in my back. I will use all the skill in my hands and all the cleverness in my mind. But I want my hard work to actually pay off. What is the matter with us? I am asking you again! Why can we not get our fair share of the good things? There is plenty for the people who have the gold to buy them."

"I wish I had an answer for you!" Kobbi replied. "I am just as unhappy about it as you are. The money I make from playing my lyre disappears immediately. I constantly have to plan and scramble just to keep my family from going hungry. Plus, I have this deep, burning desire for a bigger lyre. I want an instrument large enough to truly capture the music that constantly flows through my mind. If I had an instrument like that, I could create music far better than anything even the king has ever heard."

"You definitely deserve a lyre like that. Nobody in all of Babylon could play it more beautifully than you. You could make it sing so sweetly that the Gods themselves would be delighted, not just the king. But how are you ever going to get one when we are both as poor as the king's slaves? Listen to the bell! Here they come." He pointed at a long column of sweating, half-naked water bearers. They were trudging slowly up the narrow street from the river. They marched in rows of five. Every single one of them was bent over under the crushing weight of a heavy goatskin full of water.

"The man leading them has quite a presence," Kobbi said. He pointed to the man marching at the very front. This man wore the bell and carried no load. "It is easy to see he must have been someone important in his own country."


"There are many good figures in the line," Bansir agreed. "They are just as good as we are. There are tall, blond men from the north. There are laughing black men from the south. There are little brown men from the nearer countries. They all march together from the river to the gardens, back and forth, day after day and year after year. They have no happiness to look forward to. They sleep on beds of straw and eat hard grain porridge. Pity the poor brutes, Kobbi!"



"I do pity them. Yet, you make me see that we are barely any better off, even though we call ourselves free men."

"That is the truth, Kobbi, as unpleasant as it is to think about. We do not want to go on year after year living like slaves. Working, working, working, and getting nowhere!"

"Could we not find out how others acquire gold, and do what they do?" Kobbi inquired.

"Perhaps there is some secret we could learn, if we only asked those who know," replied Bansir thoughtfully.

"Just today," suggested Kobbi, "I passed our old friend, Arkad. He was riding in his golden chariot. I will say this for him: he did not look over my humble head, as many in his position might feel they have the right to do. Instead, he waved his hand so that all the onlookers could see him. He paid his greetings and smiled in friendship at Kobbi, the musician."

"People claim he is the richest man in all of Babylon," Bansir mused.

"He is so rich that the king is said to seek his golden aid in matters of the treasury," Kobbi replied. "So rich," Bansir interrupted, "that I am afraid if I met him in the dark of night, I would try to put my hands on his fat wallet!"

"Nonsense," scolded Kobbi. "A man's wealth is not in the purse he carries. A fat purse quickly empties if there is no golden stream to refill it. Arkad has an income that constantly keeps his purse full, no matter how freely he spends."

"Income, that is the most important thing!" exclaimed Bansir. "I want an income that will keep flowing into my purse, whether I sit upon the wall or travel to far-off lands. Arkad must know how a man can create an income for himself. Do you suppose it is something he could explain to a mind as slow as mine?"

"I think he taught his knowledge to his son, Nomasir," Kobbi responded. "Did Nomasir not go to Nineveh? They say at the inn that he became one of the richest men in that city, all without any help from his father."

"Kobbi, you bring me a rare and wonderful thought." A new light gleamed in Bansir's eyes. "It costs nothing to ask for wise advice from a good friend, and Arkad was always that. Never mind that our purses are as empty as a falcon's nest from a year ago. Let that not stop us. We are tired of being without gold in the midst of plenty. We want to become men of wealth. Come, let us go to Arkad. Let us ask how we, too, may acquire incomes for ourselves."

"You speak with true inspiration, Bansir. You bring a new understanding to my mind. You make me realize the reason why we have never found any measure of wealth. We simply never sought it out. You have labored patiently to build the strongest chariots in Babylon. You devoted your best efforts to that purpose. Therefore, you succeeded at it. I tried hard to become a skillful lyre player. And I succeeded at that, too."

"We succeeded in the things where we put our best efforts. The Gods were content to let us continue that way. Now, at last, we see a light, as bright as the rising sun. It tells us to learn more so that we may prosper more. With a new understanding, we will find honorable ways to achieve our desires."

"Let us go to Arkad this very day," Bansir urged. "Also, let us invite the other friends of our boyhood days. They have fared no better than we have. Let us ask them to join us, so that they, too, may share in his wisdom."

"You were always so thoughtful of your friends, Bansir. That is why you have so many friends. It shall be as you say. We will go today and take them with us."
