The Camel Trader of Babylon 



The hungrier one becomes, the clearer one's mind works — also the more sensitive one becomes 
to the odors of food. 

Tarkad, the son of Azure, certainly thought so. For two whole days he had tasted no food except 
two small figs purloined from over the wall of a garden. Not another could he grab before the angry 
woman rushed forth and chased him down the street. Her shrill cries were still ringing in his ears as he 
walked through the market place. They helped him to retrain his restless fingers from snatching the 
tempting fruits from the baskets of the market women. 

Never before had he realized how much food was brought to the markets of Babylon and how 
good it smelled. Leaving the market, he walked across to the inn and paced back and forth in front of 
the eating house. Perhaps here he might meet someone he knew; someone from whom he could borrow 
a copper that would gain him a smile from the unfriendly keeper of the inn and, with it, a liberal 
helping. Without the copper he knew all too well how unwelcome he would be. 

In his abstraction he unexpectedly found himself face to face with the one man he wished most 
to avoid, the tall bony figure of Dabasir, the camel trader. Of all the friends and others from whom he 
had borrowed small sums, Dabasir made him feel the most uncomfortable because of his failure to keep 
his promises to repay promptly. 

Dabasir's face lighted up at the sight of him. "Ha! Tis Tarkad, just the one I have been seeking 
that he might repay the two pieces of copper which I lent him a moon ago; also the piece of silver 
which I lent to him before that. We are well met. I can make good use of the coins this very day. What 
say, boy? What say?" 

Tarkad stuttered and his face flushed. He had naught in his empty stomach to nerve him to 
argue with the outspoken Dabasir. "I am sorry, very sorry," he mumbled weakly, "but this day I have 
neither the copper nor the silver with which I could repay." "Then get it," Dabasir insisted. "Surely thou 
canst get hold of a few coppers and a piece of silver to repay the generosity of an old friend of thy 
father who aided thee whenst thou wast in need?" 

" 'Tis because ill fortune does pursue me that I cannot pay." 

"Ill fortune! Wouldst blame the gods for thine own weakness. Ill fortune pursues every man 
who thinks more of borrowing than of repaying. Come with me, boy, while I eat. I am hungry and I 
would tell thee a tale. " 

Tarkad flinched from the brutal frankness of Dabasir, but here at least was an invitation to enter 
the coveted doorway of the eating house. 

Dabasir pushed him to a far corner of the room where they seated themselves upon small rugs. 

When Kauskor, the proprietor, appeared smiling, Dabasir addressed him with his usual 
freedom, "Fat lizard of the desert, bring to me a leg of the goat, brown with much juice, and bread and 
all of the vegetables for I am hungry and want much food. Do not forget my friend here. Bring to him a 
jug of water. Have it cooled, for the day is hot." 

Tarkad's heart sank. Must he sit here and drink water while he watched this man devour an 
entire goat leg? He said nothing. He thought of nothing he could say. 

Dabasir, however, knew no such thing as silence. Smiling and waving his hand good-naturedly 
to the other customers, all of whom knew him, he continued. 

"I did hear from a traveler just returned from Urfa of a certain rich man who has a piece of 
stone cut so thin that one can look through it. He put it in the window of his house to keep out the rains. 
It is yellow, so this traveler does relate, and he was permitted to look through it and all the outside 
world looked strange and not like it really is. What say you to that, Tarkad? Thinkest all the world 

49 



could look to a man a different color from what it is?" 

"I dare say," responded the youth, much more interested in the fat leg of goat placed before 
Dabasir. 

"Well, I know it to be true for I myself have seen the world all of a different color from what it 
really is and the tale I am about to tell relates how I came to see it in its right color once more." 

"Dabasir will tell a tale," whispered a neighboring diner to his neighbor, and dragged his rug 
close. Other diners brought their food and crowded in a semi-circle. They crunched noisily in the ears 
of Tarkad and brushed him with their meaty bones. He alone was without food. Dabasir did not offer to 
share with him nor even motion him to a small corner of the hard bread that was broken off and had 
fallen from the platter to the floor. 

"The tale that I am about to tell," began Dabasir, pausing to bite a goodly chunk from the goat 
leg, "relates to my early life and how I came to be a camel trader. Didst anyone know that I once was a 
slave in Syria?" 

A murmur of surprise ran through the audience to which Dabasir listened with satisfaction. 

"When I was a young man," continued Dabasir after another vicious onslaught on the goat leg, 
"I learned the trade of my father, the making of saddles. I worked with him in his shop and took to 
myself a wife. 

Being young and not greatly skilled, I could earn but little, just enough to support my excellent 
wife in a modest way. I craved good things which I could not afford. Soon I found that the shop keepers 
would trust me to pay later even though 

I could not pay at the time. "Being young and without experience I did not know that he who 
spends more than he earns is sowing the winds of needless self-indulgence from which he is sure to 
reap the whirlwinds of trouble and humiliation. So I indulged my whims for fine raiment and bought 
luxuries for my good wife and our home, beyond our means. "I paid as I could and for a while all went 
well. But in time I discovered I could not use my earnings both to live upon and to pay my debts. 
Creditors began to pursue me to pay for my extravagant purchases and my life became miserable. I 
borrowed from my friends, but could not repay them either. Things went from bad to worse. My wife 
returned to her father and I decided to leave Babylon and seek another city where a young man might 
have better chances. 

"For two years I had a restless and unsuccessful life working for caravan traders. From this I 
fell in with a set of likeable robbers who scoured the desert for unarmed caravans. Such deeds were 
unworthy of the son of my father, but I was seeing the world through a colored stone and did not realize 
to what degradation I had fallen. 

"We met with success on our first trip, capturing a rich haul of gold and silks and valuable 
merchandise. This loot we took to Ginir and squandered. 

"The second time we were not so fortunate. Just after we had made our capture, we were 
attacked by the spearsmen of a native chief to whom the caravans paid for protection. Our two leaders 
were killed, and the rest of us were taken to Damascus where we were stripped of our clothing and sold 
as slaves. 

"I was purchased for two pieces of silver by a Syrian desert chief. With my hair shorn and but a 
loin cloth to wear, I was not so different from the other slaves. Being a reckless youth, I thought it 
merely an adventure until my master took me before his four wives and told them they could have me 
for a eunuch. 

Then, indeed, did I realize the hopelessness of my situation. These men of the desert were 
fierce and warlike. I was subject to their will without weapons or means of escape. 

"Fearful I stood, as those four women looked me over. I wondered if I could expect pity from 
them. Sira, the first wife, was older than the others. Her face was impassive as she looked upon me. I 

50 



turned from her with little consolation. The next was a contemptuous beauty who gazed at me as 
indifferently as if I had been a worm of the earth. The two younger ones tittered as though it were all an 
exciting joke. 

"It seemed an age that I stood waiting sentence. Each woman appeared willing for the others to 
decide. Finally Sira spoke up in a cold voice. 

" 'Of eunuchs we have plenty, but of camel tenders we have few and they are a worthless lot. 
Even this day I would visit my mother who is sick with the fever and there is no slave I would trust to 
lead my camel. Ask this slave if he can lead a camel.' 

"My master thereupon questioned me, 'What know you of camels?' 

"Striving to conceal my eagerness, I replied, I can make them kneel, I can load them, I can lead 
them on long trips without tiring. If need be, I can repair their trappings." 

" The slave speaks forward enough, observed my master. If thou so desire, Sira, take this man 
for thy camel tender.' 

"So I was turned over to Sira and that day I led her camel upon a long journey to her sick 
mother. I took the occasion to thank her for her intercession and also to tell her that I was not a slave by 
birth, but the son of a freeman, an honorable saddle maker of Babylon. I also told her much of my 
story. Her comments were disconcerting to me and I pondered much afterwards on what she said. 

" 'How can you call yourself a free man when your weakness has brought you to this? If a man 
has in himself the soul of a slave will he not become one no matter what his birth, even as water seeks 
its level? If a man has within him the soul of a free man, will he not become respected and honored in 
his own city in spite of his misfortune?' 

"For over a year I was a slave and lived with the slaves, but I could not become as one of them. 
One day Sira asked me, 'In the eventime when the other slaves can mingle and enjoy the society of 
each other, why dost thou sit in thy tent alone?' 

"To which I responded, I am pondering what you have said to me. I wonder if I have the soul 
of a slave. I cannot join them, so I must sit apart.' 

" 'I, too, must sit apart,' she confided. 'My dowry was large and my lord married me because of 
it. Yet he does not desire me. What every woman longs for is to be desired. Because of this and because 
I am barren and have neither son nor daughter, must I sit apart. Were I a man I would rather die than be 
such a slave, but the conventions of our tribe make slaves of women.' 

" What think thou of me by this time?' I asked her suddenly, 'Have I the soul of a man or have I 
the soul of a slave?' 

" 'Have you a desire to repay the just debts you owe in Babylon?' she parried. 

" 'Yes, I have the desire, but I see no way' 

" If thou contentedly let the years slip by and make no effort to repay, then thou hast but the 
contemptible soul of a slave. No man is otherwise who cannot respect himself and no man can respect 
himself who does not repay honest debts.' 

" 'But what can I do who am a slave in Syria?' 

" 'Stay a slave in Syria, thou weakling.' 

" 'I am not a weakling,' I denied hotly. 

" 'Then prove it.' 

" 'How?' 

" 'Does not thy great king fight his enemies in every way he can and with every force he has? 
Thy debts are thy enemies. They ran thee out of Babylon. You left them alone and they grew too strong 
for thee. Hadst fought them as a man, thou couldst have conquered them and been one honored among 
the townspeople. But thou had not the soul to fight them and behold thy pride hast gone down until 

51 



thou art a slave in Syria.' 

"Much I thought over her unkind accusations and many defensive phrases I worded to prove 
myself not a slave at heart, but I was not to have the chance to use them. Three days later the maid of 
Sira took me to her mistress. 

" 'My mother is again very sick,' she said. 'Saddle the two best camels in my husband's herd. Tie 
on water skins and saddle bags for a long journey. The maid will give thee food at the kitchen tent.' I 
packed the camels wondering much at the quantity of provisions the maid provided, for the mother 
dwelt less than a day's journey away. The maid rode the rear camel which followed and I led the camel 
of my mistress. When we reached her mother's house it was just dark. Sira dismissed the maid and said 
to me: 

" 'Dabasir, hast thou the soul of a free man or the soul of a slave?' 

" 'The soul of a free man,' I insisted. 

" 'Now is thy chance to prove it. Thy master hath imbibed deeply and his chiefs are in a stupor. 
Take then these camels and make thy escape. Here in this bag is raiment of thy master's to disguise 
thee. I will say thou stole the camels and ran away while I visited my sick mother.' 

" 'Thou hast the soul of a queen,' I told her. 'Much do I wish that I might lead thee to happiness.' 

" 'Happiness,' she responded, 'awaits not the runaway wife who seeks it in far lands among 
strange people. Go thy own way and may the gods of the desert protect thee for the way is far and 
barren of food or water.' 

"I needed no further urging, but thanked her warmly and was away into the night. I knew not 
this strange country and had only a dim idea of the direction in which lay Babylon, but struck out 
bravely across the desert toward the hills. One camel I rode and the other I led. All that night I traveled 
and all the nest day, urged on by the knowledge of the terrible fate that was meted out to slaves who 
stole their master's property and tried to escape. 

"Late that afternoon, I reached a rough country as uninhabitable as the desert. The sharp rocks 
bruised the feet of my faithful camels and soon they were picking their way slowly and painfully along. 
I met neither man nor beast and could well understand why they shunned this inhospitable land. 

"It was such a journey from then on as few men live to tell of. Day after day we plodded along. 
Food and water gave out. The heat of the sun was merciless. At the end of the ninth day, I slid from the 
back of my mount with the feeling that I was too weak to ever remount and I would surely die, lost in 
this abandoned country. 

"I stretched out upon the ground and slept, not waking until the first gleam of daylight. 

"I sat up and looked about me. There was a coolness in the morning air. My camels lay dejected 
not far away. About me was a vast waste of broken country covered with rock and sand and thorny 
things, no sign of water, naught to eat for man or camel. 

"Could it be that in this peaceful quiet I faced my end? My mind was clearer than it had ever 
been before. My body now seemed of little importance. My parched and bleeding lips, my dry and 
swollen tongue, my empty stomach, all had lost their supreme agonies of the day before. 

"I looked across into the uninviting distance and once again came to me the question, 'Have I 
the soul of a slave or the soul of a free man?' Then with clearness I realized that if I had the soul of a 
slave, I should give up, lie down in the desert and die, a fitting end for a runaway slave. 

"But if I had the soul of a free man, what then? Surely I would force my way back to Babylon, 
repay the people who had trusted me, bring happiness to my wife who truly loved me and bring peace 
and contentment to my parents. 

" 'Thy debts are thine enemies who have run thee out of Babylon,' Sira had said. Yes it was so. 
Why had I refused to stand my ground like a man? Why had I permitted my wife to go back to her 
father? 

52 



"Then a strange thing happened. All the world seemed to be of a different color as though I had 
been looking at it through a colored stone which had suddenly been removed. At last I saw the true 
values in life. 

"Die in the desert! Not I! With a new vision, I saw the things that I must do. First I would go 
back to Babylon and face every man to whom I owed an unpaid debt. I should tell them that after years 
of wandering and misfortune, I had come back to pay my debts as fast as the gods would permit. Next I 
should make a home for my wife and become a citizen of whom my parents should be proud. 

"My debts were my enemies, but the men I owed were my friends for they had trusted me and 
believed in me. 

"I staggered weakly to my feet. What mattered hunger? What mattered thirst? They were but 
incidents on the road to Babylon. Within me surged the soul of a free man going back to conquer his 
enemies and reward his friends. I thrilled with the great resolve. 

"The glazed eyes of my camels brightened at the new note in my husky voice. With great effort, 
after many attempts, they gained their feet. With pitiful perseverance, they pushed on toward the north 
where something within me said we would find Babylon. 

"We found water. We passed into a more fertile country where were grass and fruit. We found 
the trail to Babylon because the soul of a free man looks at life as a series of problems to be solved and 
solves them, while the soul of a slave whines, What can I do who am but a slave?' 

"How about thee, Tarkad? Dost thy empty stomach make thy head exceedingly clear? Art ready 
to take the road that leads back to self respect? Canst thou see the world in its true color? Hast thou the 
desire to pay thy honest debts, however many they may be, and once again be a man respected in 
Babylon?" 

Moisture came to the eyes of the youth. He rose eagerly to his knees. "Thou has shown me a 
vision; already I feel the soul of a free man surge within me." 

"But how fared you upon your return?" questioned an interested listener. 

"Where the determination is, the way can be found" Dabasir replied. "I now had the 

determination so I set out to find a way. First I visited every man to whom I was indebted and begged 
his indulgence until I could earn that with which to repay. Most of them met me gladly. Several reviled 
me but others offered to help me; one indeed did give me the very help I needed. It was Mathon, the 
gold lender. Learning that I had been a camel tender in Syria; he sent me to old Nebatur, the camel 
trader, just commissioned by our good king to purchase many herds of sound camels for the great 
expedition. With him, my knowledge of camels I put to good use. Gradually I was able to repay every 
copper and every piece of silver. Then at last I could hold up my head and feel that I was an honorable 
man among men." 

Again Dabasir turned to his food. "Kauskor, thou snail," he called loudly to be heard in the 
kitchen, "the food is cold. Bring me more meat fresh from the roasting. Bring thou also a very large 
portion for Tarkad, the son of my old friend, who is hungry and shall eat with me." 

So ended the tale of Dabasir the camel trader of old Babylon. He found his own soul when he 
realized a great truth, a truth that had been known and used by wise men long before his time. 

It has led men of all ages out of difficulties and into success and it will continue to do so for 
those who have the wisdom to understand its magic power. It is for any man to use who reads these 
lines. 

WHERE THE DETERMINATION IS, 
THE WAY CAN BE FOUND 



53 



The CI ay Tablets From Babylon 
St. Swithin's College 



Nottingham University 

Newark-on- Trent 

Nottingham 



Professor Franklin Caldwell, 

Care of British Scientific Expedition, 

Hillah, Mesopotamia. 



October 21, 1934, 



My dear Professor: The five clay tablets from your recent excavation 
in the ruins of Babylon arrived on the same boat with your letter. I 
have been fascinated no end, and have spent many pleasant hours 
translating their inscriptions . I should have answered your letter at 
once but delayed until I could complete the translations which are 
attached. 

The tablets arrived without damage, thanks to your careful use of 
preservatives and excellent packing. 

You will be as astonished as we in the laboratory at the story they 
relate. One expects the dim and distant past to speak of romance and 
adventure. "Arabian Nights" sort of things, you know. When instead it 
discloses the problem of a person named Dabasir to pay off his debts, 
one realizes that conditions upon this old world have not changed as 
much in five thousand years as one might expect . 

It ' s odd, you know , but these old inscriptions rather "rage" me, as 
the students say. Being a college professor, I am supposed to be a 
thinking human being possessing a working knowledge of most subjects . 
Yet, here comes this old chap out of the dust— covered ruins of 
Babylon to offer a way I had never heard of to pay off my debts and 
at the same time acquire gold to jingle in my wallet . 

Pleasant thought, I say, and interesting to prove whether it will 
work as well nowadays as it did in old Babylon. Mrs. Shrewsbury and 
myself are planning to try out his plan upon our own affairs which 
could be much improved. 

Wishing you the best of luck in your worthy undertaking and waiting 
eagerly another opportunity to assist, I am 

Yours sincerely, 

54 



Alfred H. Shewsbury, 
Department of Archaeology . 



55 



Tablet No. I 

Now, when the moon becometh full, I, Dabasir, who am but recently returned from slavery in 
Syria, with the determination to pay my many just debts and become a man of means worthy of respect 
in my native city of Babylon, do here engrave upon the clay a permanent record of my affairs to guide 
and assist me in carrying through my high desires. 

Under the wise advice of my good friend Mathon, the gold lender, I am determined to follow an 
exact plan that he doth say will lead any honorable man out of debt into means and self respect. 

This plan includeth three purposes which are my hope and desire. 

First, the plan doth provide for my future prosperity. 

Therefore one-tenth of all I earn shall be set aside as my own to keep. For Mathon speaketh 
wisely when he saith: 

"That man who keepeth in his purse both gold and silver that he need not spend is good to his 
family and loyal to his king. 

"The man who hath but a few coppers in his purse is indifferent to his family and indifferent to 
his king. 

"But the man who hath naught in his purse is unkind to his family and is disloyal to his king, 
for his own heart is bitter. 

"Therefore, the man who wisheth to achieve must have coin that he may keep to jingle in his 
purse, that he have in his heart love for his family and loyalty to his king." 

Second, the plan doth provide that I shall support and clothe my good wife who hath returned 
to me with loyalty from the house of her father. For Mathon doth say that to take good care of a faithful 
wife putteth self-respect into the heart of a man and addeth strength and determination to his purposes. 

Therefore seven-tenths of all I earn shall be used to provide a home, clothes to wear, and food 
to eat, with a bit extra to spend, that our lives be not lacking in pleasure and enjoyment. But he doth 
further enjoin the greatest care that we spend not greater than seven-tenths of what I earn for these 
worthy purposes. Herein lieth the success of the plan. 

I must live upon this portion and never use more nor buy what I may not pay for out of this 
portion. 



Tablet No. II 

Third, the plan doth provide that out of my earnings my debts shall be paid. 

Therefore each time the moon is full, two-tenths of all I have earned shall be divided honorably 
and fairly among those who have trusted me and to whom I am indebted. Thus in due time will all my 
indebtedness be surely paid. Therefore, do I here engrave the name of every man to whom I am 
indebted and the honest amount of my debt. 

Fahru, the cloth weaver, 2 silver, 6 copper. 

Sinjar, the couch maker, 1 silver. 

Ahmar, my friend, 3 silver, 1 copper. 

Zankar, my friend, 4 silver, 7 copper, 

Askamir, my friend, 1 silver, 3 copper. 

Harinsir, the Jewelmaker, 6 silver, 2 copper. 

Diarbeker, my father's friend, 4 silver, 1 copper. 

Alkahad, the house owner, 14 silver. 

Mathon, the gold lender, 9 silver. 

56 



Birejik, the farmer, 1 silver, 7 copper. 

(From here on, disintegrated. Cannot be deciphered.) 

Tablet No. Ill 

To these creditors do I owe in total one hundred and nineteen pieces of silver and one hundred 
and forty-one pieces of copper. Because I did owe these sums and saw no way to repay, in my folly I 
did permit my wife to return to her father and didst leave my native city and seek easy wealth 
elsewhere, only to find disaster and to see myself sold into the degradation of slavery. 

Now that Mathon doth show me how I can repay my debts in small sums of my earnings, do I 
realize the great extent of my folly in running away from the results of my extravagances. Therefore 
have I visited my creditors and explained to them that I have no resources with which to pay except my 
ability to earn, and that I intent to apply two tenths of all I earn upon my indebtedness evenly and 
honestly. This much can I pay but no more. Therefore if they be patient, in time my obligations will be 
paid in full. 

Ahmar, whom I thought my best friend, reviled me bitterly and I left him in humiliation. 
Birejik, the farmer, pleaded that I pay him first as he didst badly need help. Alkahad, the house owner, 
was indeed disagreeable and insisted that he would make me trouble unless I didst soon settle in full 
with him. 

All the rest willingly accepted my proposal. Therefore am I more determined than ever to carry 
through, being convinced that it is easier to pay one's just debts than to avoid them. Even though I 
cannot meet the needs and demands of a few of my creditors I will deal impartially with all. 



Tablet No. IV 

Again the moon shines full. I have worked hard with a free mind. My good wife hath supported 
my intentions to pay my creditors. Because of our wise determination, I have earned during the past 
moon, buying camels of sound wind and good legs, for Nebatur, the sum of nineteen pieces of silver. 

This I have divided according to the plan. One-tenth have I set aside to keep as my own, seven- 
tenths have I divided with my good wife to pay for our living. Two-tenths have I divided among my 
creditors as evenly as could be done in coppers. 

I did not see Ahmar but left it with his wife. Birejik was so pleased he would kiss my hand. Old 
Alkahad alone was grouchy and said I must pay faster. To which I replied that if I were permitted to be 
well fed and not worried, that alone would enable me to pay faster. All the others thanked me and spoke 
well of my efforts. 

Therefore, at the end of one moon, my indebtedness is reduced by almost four pieces of silver 
and I possess almost two pieces of silver besides, upon which no man hath claim. My heart is lighter 
than it hath been for a long time. 

Again the moon shines full. I have worked hard but with poor success. Few camels have I been 
able to buy. Only eleven pieces of silver have I earned. Nevertheless my good wife and I have stood by 
the plan even though we have bought no new raiment and eaten little but herbs. 

Again I paid ourselves one-tenth of the eleven pieces, while we lived upon seven-tenths. I was 
surprised when Ahmar commended my payment, even though small. So did Birejik. Alkahad flew into 
a rage but when told to give back his portion if he did not wish it, he became reconciled. The others, as 
before, were content Again the moon shines full and I am greatly rejoiced. I intercepted a fine herd of 
camels and bought many sound ones, therefore my earnings were forty-two pieces of silver. This moon 
my wife and myself have bought much needed sandals and raiment Also we have dined well on meat 

57 



and fowl. 

More than eight pieces of silver we have paid to our creditors. Even Alkahad did not protest. 

Great is the plan for it leadeth us out of debt and giveth us wealth which is ours to keep. 

Three times the moon had been full since I last carved upon this clay. Each time I paid to 
myself one-tenth of all I earned. Each time my good wife and I have lived upon seven-tenths even 
though at times it was difficult. Each time have I paid to my creditors two-tenths. 

In my purse I now have twenty one pieces of silver that are mine. It maketh my head to stand 
straight upon my shoulders and maketh me proud to walk among my friends. My wife keepeth well our 
home and is becomingly gowned. We are happy to live together. 

The plan is of untold value. Hath it not made an honorable man of an ex-slave? 



Tablet No. V 

Again the moon shines full and I remember that it is long since I carved upon the clay. Twelve 
moons in truth have come and gone. But this day I will not neglect my record because upon this day I 
have paid the last of my debts. This is the day upon which my good wife and my thankful self celebrate 
with great feasting that our determination hath been achieved. 

Many things occurred upon my final visit to my creditors that I shall long remember. Ahmar 
begged my forgiveness for his unkind words and said that I was one of all others he most desired for a 
friend. 

Old Alkahad is not so bad after all, for he said, "Thou wert once a piece of soft clay to be 
pressed and moulded by any hand that touched thee, but now thou art a piece of bronze capable of 
holding an edge. If thou needst silver or gold at any time come to me." 

Nor is he the only one who holdeth me in high regard. Many others speak deferentially to me. 
My good wife looketh upon me with a light in her eyes that doth make a man have confidence in 
himself. 

Yet it is the plan that hath made my success. It hath enabled me to pay all my debts and to 
jingle both gold and silver in my purse. I do commend it to all who wish to get ahead. For truly if it will 
enable an ex- slave to pay his debts and have gold in his purse, will it not aid any man to find 
independence? Nor am I, myself, finished with it, for I am convinced that if I follow it further it will 
make me rich among men. 



58 



St. Swithin's College 

Nottingham University 

Newark-on- Trent 

Nottingham 

Professor Franklin Caldwell, 

Care of British Scientific Expedition, 

Hillah, Mesopotamia. 



My dear professor : 



November 7th, 1936. 



If, in your further digging into those ruins of Babylon, you 
encounter the ghost of a former resident, an old camel trader named 
Dabasir, do me a favor. Tell him that his scribbling upon those clay 
tablets, so long ago, has earned for him the life long gratitude of a 
couple of college folks back here in England. 

You will possibly remember my writing a year ago that Mrs. Shrewsbury 
and myself intended to try his plan for getting out of debt and at 
the same time having gold to jingle. You may have guessed, even 
though we tried to keep it from our friends, our desperate straits. 

We were frightfully humiliated for years by a lot of old debts and 
worried sick for fear some of the tradespeople might start a scandal 
that would force me out of the college. We paid and paid— every 
shilling we could squeeze out of income— but it was hardly enough to 
hold things even. Besides we were forced to do all our buying where 
we could get further credit regardless of higher costs. 

It developed into one of those vicious circles that grow worse 
instead of better. Our struggles were getting hopeless . We could not 
move to less costly rooms because we owed the landlord. There did not 
appear to be anything we could do to improve our situation. 

Then, here comes your acquaintance, the old camel trader from 
Babylon, with a plan to do just what we wished to accomplish. He 
jolly well stirred us up to follow his system. We made a list of all 
our debts and I took it around and showed it to everyone we owed. 

I explained how it was simply impossible for me to ever pay them the 
way things were going along. They could readily see this themselves 
from the figures . Then I explained that the only way I saw to pay in 
full was to set aside twenty percent of my income each month to be 
divided pro rata, which would pay them in full in a little over two 
years. That, in the meantime, we would go on a cash basis and give 



59 



them the further benefit of our cash purchases. 

They were really quite decent. Our greengrocer, a wise old chap, put 
it in a way that helped to bring around the rest. "If you pay for all 
you buy and then pay some on what you owe, that is better than you 
have done, for ye ain't paid down the account none in three years. " 

Finally I secured all their names to an agreement binding them not to 
molest us as long as the twenty percent of income was paid regularly. 
Then we began scheming on how to live upon seventy percent . We were 
determined to keep that extra ten percent to jingle. The thought of 
silver and possibly gold was most alluring. 

It was like having an adventure to make the change. We enjoyed 
figuring this way and that, to live comfortably upon that remaining 
seventy percent. We started with rent and managed to secure a fair 
reduction. Next we put our favorite brands of tea and such under 
suspicion and were agreeably surprised how often we could purchase 
superior qualities at less cost. 

It is too long a story for a letter but anyhow it did not prove 
difficult. We managed and right cheerfully at that. What a relief it 
proved to have our affairs in such a shape we were no longer 
persecuted by past due accounts . 

I must not neglect, however, to tell you about that extra ten percent 
we were supposed to jingle. Well, we did jingle it for some time. Now 
don't laugh too soon. You see, that is the sporty part. It is the 
real fun, to start accumulating money that you do not want to spend. 
There is more pleasure in running up such a surplus than there could 
be in spending it. 

After we had jingled to our hearts ' content, we found a more 
profitable use for it. We took up an investment upon which we could 
pay that ten percent each month. This is proving to be the most 
satisfying part of our regeneration . It is the first thing we pay out 
of my check. 

There is a most gratifying sense of security to know our investment 
is growing steadily. By the time my teaching days are over it should 
be a snug sum, large enough so the income will take care of us from 
then on . 

All this out of my same old check. Difficult to believe, yet 
absolutely true. All our debts being gradually paid and at the same 
time our investment increasing. Besides we get along, financially, 
even better than before. Who would believe there could be such a 



60 



difference in results between following a financial plan and just 
drifting along. 

At the end of the next year, when all our old bills shall have been 
paid, we will have more to pay upon our investment besides some extra 
for travel . 

We are determined never again to permit our living expenses to exceed 
seventy percent of our income. Now you can understand why we would 
like to extend our personal thanks to that old chap whose plan saved 
us from our "Hell on Earth. " 

He knew. He had been through it all. He wanted others to benefit from 
his own bitter experiences. That is why he spent tedious hours 
carving his message upon the clay. He had a real message for fellow 
sufferers, a message so important that after five thousand years it 
has risen out of the ruins of Babylon, just as true and just as vital 
as the day it was buried. 

Yours sincerely, 

Alfred H. Shrewsbury, 
Department of Archaeology . 



61 



The Luckiest Man in Babylon 

At the head of his caravan, proudly rode Sharru Nada, the merchant prince of Babylon. He 
liked fine cloth and wore rich and becoming robes. He liked fine animals and sat easily upon his 
spirited Arabian stallion. To look at him one would hardly have guessed his advanced years. Certainly 
they would not have suspected that he was inwardly troubled. 

The journey from Damascus is long and the hardships of the desert many. These he minded not. 
The Arab tribes are fierce and eager to loot rich caravans. These he feared not for his many fleet 
mounted guards were a safe protection. 

About the youth at his side, whom he was bringing from Damascus, was he disturbed. This was 
Hadan Gula, the grandson of his partner of other years, Arad Gula, to whom he felt he owed a debt of 
gratitude which could never be repaid. He would like to do something for this grandson, but the more 
he considered this, the more difficult it seemed because of the youth himself. 

Eyeing the young man's rings and earrings, he thought to himself, "He thinks jewels are for 
men, still he has his grandfather's strong face. But his grandfather wore no such gaudy robes. Yet, I 
sought him to come, hoping I might help him get a start for himself and get away from the wreck his 
father has made of their inheritance." 

Hadan Gula broke in upon his thoughts, "Why dost thou work so hard, riding always with thy 
caravan upon its long journeys? Dost thou never take time to enjoy life?" 

Sharru Nada smiled. "To enjoy life?" he repeated. "What wouldst thou do to enjoy life if thou 
wert Sharru Nada?" 

"If I had wealth equal to thine, I would live like a prince. Never across the hot desert would I 
ride. I would spend the shekels as fast as they came to my purse. I would wear the richest of robes and 
the rarest of jewels. That would be a life to my liking, a life worth living." Both men laughed. 

"Thy grandfather wore no jewels." Sharru Nada spoke before he thought, then continued 
jokingly, "Wouldst thou leave no time for work?" 

"Work was made for slaves," Hadan Gula responded. 

Sharra Nada bit his lip but made no reply, riding in silence until the trail led them to the slope. 
Here he reined his mount and pointing to the green valley far away, "See, there is the valley. Look far 
down and thou canst faintly see the walls of Babylon. The tower is the Temple of Bel. If thine eyes are 
sharp thou mayest even see the smoke from the eternal fire upon its crest." 

"So that is Babylon? Always have I longed to see the wealthiest city in all the world," Hadan 
Gula commented. "Babylon, where my grandfather started his fortune. Would he were still alive. We 
would not be so sorely pressed." 

"Why wish his spirit to linger on earth beyond its allotted time? Thou and thy father can well 
carry on his good work." 

"Alas, of us, neither has his gift. Father and myself know not his secret for attracting the golden 
shekels." 

Sharru Nada did not reply but gave rein to his mount and rode thoughtfully down the trail to the 
valley. Behind them followed the caravan in a cloud of reddish dust. Some time later they reached the 
Kings' highway and turned south through the irrigated farms. 

Three old men plowing a field caught Sharru Nada's attention. They seemed strangely familiar. 
How ridiculous! One does not pass a field after forty years and find the same men plowing there. Yet, 
something within him said they were the same. One, with an uncertain grip, held the plow. The others 
laboriously plodded beside the oxen, ineffectually beating them with their barrel staves to keep them 
pulling. 

62 



Forty years ago he had envied these men! How gladly he would have exchanged places! But 
what a difference now. With pride he looked back at his trailing caravan, well- chosen camels and 
donkeys, loaded high with valuable goods from Damascus. All this was but one of his possessions. 

He pointed to the plowers, saying, "Still plowing the same field where they were forty years 
ago." 

"They look it, but why thinkest thou they are the same?" 

"I saw them there," Sharru Nada replied. Recollections were racing rapidly through his mind. 
Why could he not bury the past and live in the present? Then he saw, as in a picture, the smiling face of 
Arad Gula. The barrier between himself and the cynical youth beside him dissolved. 

But how could he help such a superior youth with his spendthrift ideas and bejeweled hands? 
Work he could offer in plenty to willing workers, but naught for men who considered themselves too 
good for work. Yet he owed it to Arad Gula to do something, not a half-hearted attempt. He and Arad 
Gula had never done things that way. They were not that sort of men. 

A plan came almost in a flash. There were objections. He must consider his own family and his 
own standing. It would be cruel; it would hurt. Being a man of quick decisions, he waived objections 
and decided to act. 

"Wouldst thou be interested in hearing how thy worthy grandfather and myself joined in the 
partnership which proved so profitable?" he questioned. 

"Why not just tell me how thou madest the golden shekels? That is all I need to know," the 
young man parried. 

Sharru Nada ignored the reply and continued, "We start with those men plowing. I was no older 
than thou. As the column of men in which I marched approached, good old Megiddo, the farmer, 
scoffed at the slip-shod way in which they plowed. Megiddo was chained next to me. 'Look at the lazy 
fellows,' he protested, 'the plow holder makes no effort to plow deep, nor do the beaters keep the oxen 
in the furrow. How can they expect to raise a good crop with poor plowing?" 

"Didst thou say Megiddo was chained to thee?" Hadan Gula asked in surprise. 

"Yes, with bronze collars about our necks and a length of heavy chain between us. Next to him 
was Zabado, the sheep thief. I had known him in Harroun. At the end was a man we called Pirate 
because he told us not his name. We judged him as a sailor as he had entwined serpents tattooed upon 
his chest in sailor fashion. The column was made up thus so the men could walk in fours." 

"Thou wert chained as a slave?" Hadan Gula asked incredulously. 

"Did not thy grandfather tell thee I was once a slave?" 

"He often spoke of thee but never hinted of this." 

"He was a man thou couldst trust with innermost secrets. Thou, too, are a man I may trust, am I 
not right?" Sharru Nada looked him squarely in the eye. 

"Thou mayest rely upon my silence, but I am amazed. Tell me how didst thou come to be a 
slave?" 

Sharru Nada shrugged his shoulders, "Any man may find himself a slave. It was a gaming 
house and barley beer that brought me disaster. I was the victim of my brother's indiscretions. In a 
brawl he killed his friend. I was bonded to the widow by my fattier, desperate to keep my brother from 
being prosecuted under the law. When my father could not raise the silver to free me, she in anger sold 
me to the slave dealer." 

"What a shame and injustice!" Hadan Gula protested. "But tell me, how didst thou regain 
freedom?" 

"We shall come to that, but not yet. Let us continue my tale. As we passed, the plowers jeered at 
us. One did doff his ragged hat and bow low, calling out, "Welcome to Babylon, guests of the King. He 
waits for thee on the city walls where the banquet is spread, mud bricks and onion soup.' With that they 

63 



laughed uproariously. 

"Pirate flew into a rage and cursed them roundly. 'What do those men mean by the King 
awaiting us on the walls?' I asked him. 

"To the city walls ye march to carry bricks until the back breaks. Maybe they beat thee to death 
before it breaks. They won't beat me. Ill kill 'em.' 

"Then Megiddo spoke up, 'It doesn't make sense to me to talk of masters beating willing, hard- 
working slaves to death. Masters like good slaves and treat them well." 

" 'Who wants to work hard?' commented Zabado. Those plowers are wise fellows. They're not 
breaking their backs. Just letting on as if they be.' 

" 'Thou can't get ahead by shirking,' Megiddo protested. If thou plow a hectare, that's a good 
day's work and any master knows it. But when thou plow only a half, that's shirking. I don't shirk. I like 
to work and I like to do good work, for work is the best friend I've ever known. It has brought me all 
the good things I've had, my farm and cows and crops, everything.' 

" 'Yea, and where be these things now?' scoffed Zabado. 1 figure it pays better to be smart and 
get by without working. You watch Zabado, if we're sold to the walls, he'll be carrying the water bag or 
some easy job when thou, who like to work, will be breaking thy back carrying bricks.' He laughed his 
silly laugh. 

"Terror gripped me that night. I could not sleep. I crowded close to the guard rope, and when 
the others slept, I attracted the attention of Godoso who was doing the first guard watch. He was one of 
those brigand Arabs, the sort of rogue who, if he robbed thee of thy purse, would think he must also cut 
thy throat. 

" 'Tell me, Godoso,' I whispered, 'when we get to Babylon will we be sold to the walls?' 

" Why want to know?' he questioned cautiously. 

" 'Canst thou not understand?' I pleaded. 1 am young. I want to live. I don't want to be worked 
or beaten to death on the walls. Is there any chance for me to get a good master?' 

"He whispered back, I tell something. Thou good fellow, give Godoso no trouble. Most times 
we go first to slave market. Listen now. When buyers come, tell 'em you good worker, like to work 
hard for good master. Make 'em want to buy. You not make 'em buy, next day you carry brick. Mighty 
hard work.' 

"After he walked away, I lay in the warm sand, looking up at the stars and thinking about work. 
What Megiddo had said about it being his best friend made me wonder if it would be my best friend. 
Certainly it would be if it helped me out of this. 

"When Megiddo awoke, I whispered my good news to him. It was our one ray of hope as we 
marched toward Babylon. Late in the afternoon we approached the walls and could see the lines of 
men, like black ants, climbing up and down the steep diagonal paths. As we drew closer, we were 
amazed at the thousands of men working; some were digging in the moat, others mixed the dirt into 
mud bricks. The greatest number were carrying the bricks in large baskets up those steep trails to the 
masons.* 

"Overseers cursed the laggards and cracked bullock whips over the backs of those who failed to 
keep in line. Poor, worn-out fellows were seen to stagger and fall beneath their heavy baskets, unable to 
rise again. If the lash failed to bring them to their feet, they were pushed to the side of the paths and left 
writhing in agony. Soon they would be dragged down to join other craven bodies beside the roadway to 
await un-sanctified graves. As I beheld the ghastly sight, I shuddered. So this was what awaited my 
father's son if he failed at the slave market. 

*The famous works of ancient Babylon, its walls, temples, hanging gardens and great canals, 

64 



were built by slave labor, mainly prisoners of war, which explains the inhuman treatment they received. 
This force of workmen also included many citizens of Babylon and its provinces who had been sold 
into slavery because of crimes or financial troubles. It was a common custom for men to put 
themselves, their wives or their children up as a bond to guarantee payment of loans, legal judgments 
or other obligations. In case of default, those so bonded were sold into slavery. 



65 



"Godoso had been right. We were taken through the gates of the city to the slave prison and 
next morning marched to the pens in the market. Here the rest of the men huddled in fear and only the 
whips of our guard could keep them moving so the buyers could examine them. Megiddo and myself 
eagerly talked to every man who permitted us to address him. 

"The slave dealer brought soldiers from the King's Guard who shackled Pirate and brutally beat 
him when he protested. As they led him away, I felt sorry for him. 

"Megiddo felt that we would soon part. When no buyers were near, he talked to me earnestly to 
impress upon me how valuable work would be to me in the future: 'Some men hate it. They make it 
their enemy. Better to treat it like a friend, make thyself like it. Don't mind because it is hard. If thou 
thinkest about what a good house thou build, then who cares if the beams are heavy and it is far from 
the well to carry the water for the plaster. Promise me, boy, if thou get a master, work for him as hard as 
thou canst. If he does not appreciate all thou do, never mind. Remember, work, well-done, does good to 
the man who does it. It makes him a better man.' He stopped as a burly farmer came to the enclosure 
and looked at us critically. 

"Megiddo asked about his farm and crops, soon convincing him that he would be a valuable 
man. After violent bargaining with the slave dealer, the farmer drew a fat purse from beneath his robe, 
and soon Megiddo had followed his new master out of sight. 

"A few other men were sold during the morning. At noon Godoso confided to me that the dealer 
was disgusted and would not stay over another night but would take all who remained at sundown to 
the King's buyer. I was becoming desperate when a fat, good-natured man walked up to the wall and 
inquired if there was a baker among us. 

"I approached him saying, "Why should a good baker like thyself seek another baker of inferior 
ways? Would it not be easier to teach a willing man like myself thy skilled ways? Look at me, I am 
young, strong and like to work. Give me a chance and I will do my best to earn gold and silver for thy 
purse. " 

"He was impressed by my willingness and began bargaining with the dealer who had never 
noticed me since he had bought me but now waxed eloquent on my abilities, good health and good 
disposition. I felt like a fat ox being sold to a butcher. At last, much to my joy, the deal was closed. I 
followed my new master away, thinking I was the luckiest man in Babylon. 

"My new home was much to my liking. Nana-naid, my master, taught me how to grind the 
barley in the stone bowl that stood in the courtyard, how to build the fire in the oven and then how to 
grind very fine the sesame flour for the honey cakes. I had a couch in the shed where his grain was 
stored. The old slave housekeeper, Swasti, fed me well and was pleased at the way I helped her with the 
heavy tasks. 

"Here was the chance I had longed for to make myself valuable to my master and, I hoped, to 
find a way to earn my freedom. 

"I asked Nana-naid to show me how to knead the bread and to bake. This he did, much pleased 
at my willingness. Later, when I could do this well, I asked him to show me how to make the honey 
cakes, and soon I was doing all the baking. My master was glad to be idle, but Swasti shook her head in 
disapproval, 'No work to do is bad for any man,' she declared. 

"I felt it was time for me to think of a way by which I might start to earn coins to buy my 
freedom. As the baking was finished at noon, I thought Nana-naid would approve if I found profitable 
employment for the afternoons and might share my earnings with me. Then the thought came to me, 
why not bake more of the honey cakes and peddle them to hungry men upon the streets of the city? 

"I presented my plan to Nana-naid this way: If I can use my afternoons after the baking is 
finished to earn for thee coins, would it be only fair for thee to share my earnings with me that I might 
have money of my own to spend for those things which every man desires and needs? 

66 



" 'Fair enough, fair enough,' he admitted. When I told him of my plan to peddle our honey 
cakes, he was well pleased. 'Here is what we will do,' he suggested. 'Thou sellest them at two for a 
penny, then half of the pennies will be mine to pay for the flour and the honey and the wood to bake 
them. Of the rest, I shall take half and thou shall keep half.' 

"I was much pleased by his generous offer that I might keep for myself, one-fourth of my sales. 
That night I worked late to make a tray upon which to display them. Nana-naid gave me one of his 
worn robes that I might look well, and Swasti helped me patch it and wash it clean. 

"The next day I baked an extra supply of honey cakes. They looked brown and tempting upon 
the tray as I went along the street, loudly calling my wares. At first no one seemed interested, and I 
became discouraged. I kept on and later in the afternoon as men became hungry, the cakes began to sell 
and soon my tray was empty. 

"Nana-naid was well pleased with my success and gladly paid me my share. I was delighted to 
own pennies. Megiddo had been right when he said a master appreciated good work from his slaves. 
That night I was so excited over my success I could hardly sleep and tried to figure how much I could 
earn in a year and how many years would be required to buy my freedom. 

"As I went forth with my tray of cakes every day, I soon found regular customers. One of these 
was none other than thy grandfather, Arad Gula. He was a rug merchant and sold to the housewives, 
going from one end of the city the other, accompanied by a donkey loaded high with rugs and a black 
slave to tend it. He would buy two cakes for himself and two for his slave, always tarrying to talk with 
me while they ate them. 

Thy grandfather said something to me one day that I shall always remember. 'I like thy cakes, 
boy, but better still I like the fine enterprise with which thou offerest them. Such spirit can carry thee 
far on the road to success.' 

"But how canst thou understand, Hadan Gula, what such words of encouragement could mean 
to a slave boy, lonesome in a great city, struggling with all he had in him to find a way out of his 
humiliation? 

"As the months went by I continued to add pennies to my purse. It began to have a comforting 
weight upon my belt. Work was proving to be my best friend Just as Megiddo had said. I was happy but 
Swasti was worried. 

" 'Thy master, I fear to have him spend so much time at the gaming houses,' she protested. 

"I was overjoyed one day to meet my friend Megiddo upon the street. He was leading three 
donkeys loaded with vegetables to the market. 1 am doing mighty well,' he said. 'My master does 
appreciate my good work for now I am a foreman. See, he does trust the marketing to me, and also he 
is sending for my family. Work is helping me to recover from my great trouble. Some day it will help 
me to buy my freedom and once more own a farm of my own.' 

"Time went on and Nana-naid became more and more anxious for me to return from selling. He 
would be waiting when I returned and would eagerly count and divide our money. He would also urge 
me to seek further markets and increase my sales. 

"Often I went outside the city gates to solicit the overseers of the slaves building the walls. I 
hated to return to the disagreeable sights but found the overseers liberal buyers. One day I was 
surprised to see Zabado waiting in line to fill his basket with bricks. He was gaunt and bent, and his 
back was covered with welts and sores from the whips of the overseers. I was sorry for him and handed 
him a cake which he crushed into his mouth like a hungry animal. Seeing the greedy look in his eyes, I 
ran before he could grab my tray. 

" 'Why dost thou work so hard?' Arad Gula said to me one day. Almost the same question thou 
asked of me today, dost thou remember? I told him what Megiddo had said about work and how it was 
proving to be my best friend. I showed him with pride my wallet of pennies and explained how I was 

67 



saving them to buy my freedom. 

" 'When thou art free, what wilt thou do?' he inquired. 

" 'Then,' I answered, I intend to become a merchant.' 

"At that, he confided in me. Something I had never suspected. 'Thou knowest not that I, also, 
am a slave. I am in partnership with my master.' " 

"Stop," demanded Hadan Gula. 1 will not listen to lies defaming my grandfather. He was no 
slave." His eyes blazed in anger. 

Sharru Nada remained calm. "I honor him for rising above his misfortune and becoming a 
leading citizen of Damascus. Art thou, his grandson, cast of the same mold? Art thou man enough to 
face true facts, or dost thou prefer to live under false illusions?" 

Hadan Gula straightened in his saddle. In a voice suppressed with deep emotion he replied, 
"My grandfather was beloved by all. Countless were his good deeds. When the famine came did not his 
gold buy grain in Egypt and did not his caravan bring it to Damascus and distribute it to the people so 
none would starve? Now thou sayest he was but a despised slave in Babylon." 

"Had he remained a slave in Babylon, then he might well have been despised, but when, 
through his own efforts, he became a great man in Damascus, the Gods indeed condoned his 
misfortunes and honored him with their respect," Sharru Nada replied. 

"After telling me that he was a slave," Sharru Nada continued, 'he explained how anxious he 
had been to earn his freedom. Now that he had enough money to buy this he was much disturbed as to 
what he should do. He was no longer making good sales and feared to leave the support of his master. 

"I protested his indecision: 'Cling no longer to thy master. Get once again the feeling of being a 
free man. Act like a free man and succeed like one! Decide what thou desirest to accomplish and then 
work will aid thee to achieve it!' He went on his way saying he was glad I had shamed him for his 
cowardice.* 

"One day I went outside the gates again, and was surprised to find a great crowd gathering 
there. When I asked a man for an explanation he replied: 'Hast thou not heard? An escaped slave who 
murdered one of the King's guards has been brought to justice and will this day be flogged to death for 
his crime. Even the King himself is to be here.' 

"So dense was the crowd about the flogging post, I feared to go near lest my tray of honey 
cakes be upset. Therefore, I climbed up the unfinished wall to see over the heads of the people. I was 
fortunate in having a view of Nebuchadnezzar himself as he rode by in his golden chariot. Never had I 
beheld such grandeur, such robes and hangings of gold cloth and velvet. 

"I could not see the flogging though I could hear the shrieks of the poor slave. I wandered how 
one so noble as our handsome King could endure to see such suffering, yet when I saw he was laughing 
and joking with his nobles, I knew he was cruel and understood why such inhuman tasks were 
demanded of the slaves building the walls. 

"After the slave was dead, his body was hung upon a pole by a rope attached to his leg so all 
might see. As the crowd began to thin, I went close. On the hairy chest, I saw tattooed, two entwined 
serpents. It was Pirate. "The next time I met Arad Gula he was a changed man.Full of enthusiasm he 
greeted me: 'Behold, the slave thou knewest is now a free man. There was magic in thy words. Already 
my sales and my profits are increasing. My wife is overjoyed. She was a free woman, the niece of my 
master. She much desires that we move to a strange city where no man shall know I was once a slave. 
Thus our children shall be above reproach for their father's misfortune. Work has become my best 
helper. It has enabled me to recapture my confidence and my skill to sell.' 

"I was overjoyed that I had been able even in a small way, to repay him for the encouragement 
he had given me. 



68 



*Slave customs in ancient Babylon, though they may seem inconsistent to us, were strictly regulated by 
law. For example, a slave could own property of any kind, even other slaves upon which his master had 
no claim. Slaves intermarried freely with non-slaves. Children of free mothers were free. Most of the 
city merchants were slaves. Many of these were in partnership with their masters and wealthy in their 
own right. 



69 



"One evening Swasti came to me in deep distress: 'Thy master is in trouble. I fear for him. 
Some months ago he lost much at the gaming tables. He pays not the farmer for his grain nor his honey. 
He pays not the money lender. They are angry and threaten him.' " 

"Why should we worry over his folly. We are not his keepers,' I replied thoughtlessly. 

" 'Foolish youth, thou understandeth not. To the money lender didst he give thy title to secure a 
loan. Under the law he can claim thee and sell thee. I know not what to do. He is a good master. Why? 
Oh why, should such trouble 

come upon him?' 

"Not were Swasti's fears groundless. While I was doing the baking next morning, the money 
lender returned with a man he called Sasi. This man looked me over and said I would do. 

"The money lender waited not for my master to return but told Swasti to tell him he had taken 
me. With only the robe on my back and the purse of pennies hanging safely from my belt, I was hurried 
away from the unfinished baking. 

"I was whirled away from my dearest hopes as the hurricane snatches the tree from the forest 
and casts it into the surging sea. Again a gaming house and barley beer had caused me disaster. 

"Sasi was a blunt, gruff man. As he led me across the city, I told him of the good work I had 
been doing for Nana-naid and said I hoped to do good work for him. His reply offered no 
encouragement: 

" 1 like not this work. My master likes it not. The King has told him to send me to build a 
section of the Grand Canal. Master tells Sasi to buy more slaves, work hard and finish quick. Bah, how 
can any man finish a big job quick?' 

"Picture a desert with not a tree, just low shrubs and a sun burning with such fury the water in 
our barrels became so hot we could scarcely drink it. Then picture rows of men, going down into the 
deep escavation and lugging heavy baskets of dirt up soft, dusty trails from daylight until dark. Picture 
food served in open troughs from which we helped ourselves like swine. We had no tents, no straw for 
beds. That was the situation in which I found myself. I buried my wallet in a marked spot, wondering if 
I would ever dig it up again. 

"At first I worked with good will, but as the months dragged on, I felt my spirit breaking. Then 
the heat fever took hold of my weary body. I lost my appetite and could scarcely eat the mutton and 
vegetables. At night I would toss in unhappy wakefulness. 

"In my misery, I wondered if Zabado had not the best plan, to shirk and keep his back from 
being broken in work. Then I recalled my last sight of him and knew his plan was not good. 

"I thought of Pirate with his bitterness and wondered if it might be just as well to fight and kill. 
The memory of his bleeding body reminded me that his plan was also useless. 

"Then I remembered my last sight of Megiddo. His hands were deeply calloused from hard 
work but his heart was light and there was happiness on his face. His was the best plan. 

"Yet I was just as willing to work as Megiddo; he could not have worked harder than I. Why 
did not my work bring me happiness and success? Was it work that brought Megiddo happiness, or was 
happiness and success merely in the laps of the Gods? Was I to work the rest of my life without gaining 
my desires, without happiness and success? All of these questions were jumbled in my mind and I had 
not an answer. Indeed, I was sorely confused. "Several days later when it seemed that I was at the end 
of my endurance and my questions still unanswered, Sasi sent for me. A messenger had come from my 
master to take me back to Babylon. I dug up my precious wallet, wrapped myself in the tattered 
remnants of my robe and was on my way. 

"As we rode, the same thoughts of a hurricane whirling me hither and thither kept racing 
through my feverish brain. I seemed to be living the weird words of a chant from my native town of 
Harroun: 

70 



Besetting a man like a whirlwind, 
Driving him like a storm, 
Whose course no one can foliate, 
Whose destiny no one can foretell. 

"Was I destined to be ever thus punished for I knew not what? What new miseries and 
disappointments awaited me? 

"When we rode to the courtyard of my master's house, imagine my surprise when I saw Arad 
Gula awaiting me. He helped me down and hugged me like a long lost brother. 

"As we went our way I would have followed him as a slave should follow his master, but he 
would not permit me. He put his arm about me, saying, 'I hunted everywhere for thee. When I had 
almost given up hope, I did meet Swasti who told me of the money lender, who directed me to thy 
noble owner. A hard bargain he did drive and made me pay an outrageous price, but thou art worth it. 
Thy philosophy and thy enterprise have been my inspiration to this new success." 

" 'Megiddo's philosophy, not mine,' I interrupted. 

" 'Megiddo's and thine. Thanks to thee both, we are going to Damascus and I need thee for my 
partner. 'See,' he exclaimed, 'in one moment thou will be a free man!' So saying he drew from beneath 
his robe the clay tablet carrying my title. This he raised above his head and hurled it to break in a 
hundred pieces upon the cobble stones. With glee he stamped upon the fragments until they were but 
dust. 

"Tears of gratitude filled my eyes. I knew I was the luckiest man in Babylon. 

"Work, thou see, by this, in the time of my greatest distress, didst prove to be my best friend. 
My willingness to work enabled me to escape from being sold to join the slave gangs upon the walls. It 
also so impressed thy grandfather, he selected me for his partner." 

Then Hadan Gula questioned, "Was work my grandfather's secret key to the golden shekels?" 
"It was the only key he had when I first knew him," Sharru Nada replied. "Thy grandfather enjoyed 
working. The Gods appreciated his efforts and rewarded him liberally." 

"I begin to see," Hadan Gula was speaking thoughtfully. "Work attracted his many friends who 
admired his industry and the success it brought. Work brought him the honors he enjoyed so much in 
Damascus. Work brought him all those things I have approved. And I thought work was fit only for 
slaves." 

"Life is rich with many pleasures for men to enjoy," Sharru Nada commented. "Each has its 
place. I am glad that work is not reserved for slaves. Were that the case I would be deprived of my 
greatest pleasure. Many things do I enjoy but nothing takes the place of work." 

Sharru Nada and Hadan Gula rode in the shadows of the towering walls up to the massive, 
bronze gates of Babylon. At their approach the gate guards jumped to attention and respectfully saluted 
an honored citizen. With head held high Sharru Nada led the long caravan through the gates and up the 
streets of the city. 

"I have always hoped to be a man like my grandfather," Hadan Gula confided to him. "Never 
before did I realize just what kind of man he was. This thou hast shown me. Now that I understand, I do 
admire him all the more and feel more determined to be like him. I fear I can never repay thee for 
giving me the true key to his success. From this day forth, I shall use his key. I shall start humbly as he 
started, which befits my true station far better than jewels and fine robes." 

So saying Hadan Gula pulled the jeweled baubles from his ears and the rings from his fingers. 
Then reining his horse, He dropped back and rode with deep respect behind the Leader of the caravan. 

71 



72