The Richest Man in Babylon
by George S. Clason

A Free eBook from
BizBuildersUSA.org

First Published in 1926.

Table of Contents

About the author 3

Foreword 5

An Historical Sketch of Babylon 6

The Man Who Desired Gold 9

The Richest Man in Babylon 12

Seven Cures for a Lean Purse 17

THE FIRST CURE 18

Start your purse to fattening 18

THE SECOND CURE 19

Control your expenditures 19

THE THIRD CURE 20

Make your gold multiply 20

THE FOURTH CURE 21

Guard your treasures from loss 21

THE FIFTH CURE 22

Make your dwelling a profitable investment 22

THE SIXTH CURE 23

Insure a future income 23

THE SEVENTH CURE 24

Increase your ability to earn 24

Meet the Goddess of Good Luck 26

The Five Laws of Gold
The First Law of Gold
The Second Law of Gold
The Third Law of Gold
The Fourth Law of Gold
The Fifth Law of Gold
The Gold Lender of Babylon
The Walls of Babylon
The Camel Trader of Babylon
The Clay Tablets From Babylon
Tablet No. I
Tablet No. II
Tablet No. III
Tablet No. IV
Tablet No. V
The Luckiest Man in Babylon

Your future stretches out before you, like a road leading into the distance. Along that road are ambitions you want to achieve, and desires you hope to fulfill.

To make your ambitions and desires a reality, you must be successful with money. Use the financial principles explained in the following pages. Let them guide you away from the struggles of an empty purse, and towards the richer, happier life that a full purse makes possible.

Just like the law of gravity, these principles are universal and never change. May they prove to be for you, as they have for so many others, a reliable key to a full purse, bigger bank accounts, and satisfying financial growth.

Indeed, money is plentiful
For those who understand
The simple rules of how to get it.

1.  Start making your purse fatter.
2.  Control your spending.
3.  Make your gold multiply.
4.  Protect your treasures from loss.
5.  Make your home a profitable investment.
6.  Ensure a future income.
7.  Increase your ability to earn.