[Chapter 3: Is Opportunity Monopolized?]

Nobody stays poor because someone else took away their opportunities. It's not because other people have all the wealth and put a fence around it. You might be blocked from doing business in some areas, but there are always other paths open to you. It would probably be tough to take over any of the big railroad companies. That industry is pretty much controlled by a few. But the electric railway business is still very new, and it offers lots of room for new ventures. In just a few years, air travel and transportation will become a huge industry. It will create jobs for hundreds of thousands, maybe even millions, of people in all its different parts. So, why not focus on developing air transportation instead of competing with people like J. J. Hill for a spot in the steam railway world?

It's true that if you work for a steel company, you probably won't become the owner of the factory where you work. But it's also true that if you start acting in a Certain Way, you can quickly leave that job. You could buy a farm, maybe ten to forty acres, and start a business growing food. Right now, there's a huge opportunity for people who will live on small plots of land and farm them very intensely. Those people will definitely get rich. You might say it's impossible for you to get land. But I'm going to prove to you that it's not impossible. You can definitely get a farm if you start working in a Certain Way.

At different times, opportunities shift in different directions. This depends on what society as a Whole needs and the current stage of social development. Right now, in America, opportunities are moving towards agriculture and related industries and professions. Today, farmers have more opportunities in their field than factory workers do in theirs. Business people who supply farmers have more opportunities than those who supply factory workers. And professionals who serve farmers have more opportunities than those who serve the working class.

There are plenty of opportunities for anyone who goes with the flow instead of trying to swim against it.

So, factory workers, whether as individuals or as a group, aren't being denied opportunities. Their bosses aren't "keeping them down," and big corporations or wealthy groups aren't "grinding them up." As a group, they are in their current situation because they don't do things in a Certain Way. If American workers chose to, they could follow the example of their counterparts in Belgium and other countries. They could set up large department stores and co-operative businesses. They could elect people from their own class to political office and pass laws that support the growth of these co-operative industries. In just a few years, they could peacefully take over the industrial sector.

The working class can become the "master class" whenever they start doing things in a Certain Way. The laws of wealth apply to them just as they do to everyone else. They need to learn this. They will stay exactly where they are as long as they keep doing things the same way. However, individual workers aren't held back by their class's ignorance or mental laziness. They can follow the wave of opportunity to wealth, and this book will show them how.

Nobody stays poor because there isn't enough wealth to go around. There's more than enough for everyone. You could build a palace as big as the Capitol building in Washington for every family on Earth, just using the building materials available in the United States alone. And with intensive farming, this country could produce enough wool, cotton, linen, and silk to dress every person in the world more lavishly than King Solomon in all his splendor. Plus, there would be enough food to feed everyone sumptuously. The visible supply is practically endless, and the invisible supply truly IS endless.

*Everything you see on Earth is made from one original substance, and all things come from it.*

New forms are constantly being created, and older ones are breaking down. But all of them are just different shapes taken by One Thing.

There's no limit to the supply of Formless Stuff, or Original Substance. The universe is made from it, but not all of it was used to create the universe. The spaces within, throughout, and between all the visible forms of the universe are filled with the Original Substance. They are filled with the Formless Stuff, the raw material of everything. Even if ten thousand times more than what already exists were created, we still wouldn't have used up the supply of universal raw material.

So, no one is poor because nature is poor, or because there isn't enough to go around.

Nature is an endless storehouse of wealth; the supply will never run out. Original Substance is alive with creative energy, and it's always producing more forms. When the building material runs out, more will be produced. When the soil is so depleted that food and clothing materials can no longer grow on it, it will be renewed, or more soil will be created. When all the gold and silver has been dug from the Earth, if humanity still needs gold and silver at that stage of social development, more will be produced from the Formless. The Formless Stuff responds to human needs. It won't let anyone be without something good.

This is true for humanity as a whole. The human race is always incredibly rich. If individuals are poor, it's because they don't follow the Certain Way of doing things that makes individual people rich.

The Formless Stuff is intelligent; it's a substance that thinks. It's alive, and it's always driven towards more life.

Life's natural and inherent drive is to seek to live more. Intelligence naturally wants to expand, and consciousness wants to extend its limits and express itself more fully. The universe of forms was created by Formless Living Substance, which took on these shapes to express itself more completely.

The universe is a magnificent Living Presence, always naturally moving towards more life and fuller functioning.

Nature is designed to advance life; its main driving force is to increase life. Because of this, everything that can possibly support life is generously provided. There can be no shortage unless God were to contradict himself and undo his own creations.

You aren't kept poor because there's a shortage of wealth. I'll show you a little later that even the resources of the Formless Supply are available to any man or woman who acts and thinks in a Certain Way.