Chapter 16
Some Cautions, and Concluding Observations

Many people will laugh at the idea that there is an exact science to getting rich. Holding onto the belief that the supply of wealth is limited, they will insist that social and political systems must be changed before any significant number of people can ever become financially secure.

But this simply isn't true.

It is true that some existing governments keep the masses in poverty, but that's because the masses aren't thinking and acting in the Certain Way.

If the masses started moving forward as suggested in this book, neither governments nor economic systems could stop them. All systems would be forced to modify themselves to accommodate that forward movement.

If people have the Advancing Mind, if they have the Faith that they can become rich, and if they move forward with the fixed purpose to become rich, absolutely nothing can keep them in poverty.

Individuals can start on the Certain Way at any time, under any government, and make themselves rich. And when a large number of individuals do this under any government, they will cause the system to change in a way that opens the door for others.

The more people who get rich on the competitive level, the worse it is for everyone else. But the more people who get rich on the creative level, the better it is for everyone else.

The economic salvation of the masses can only happen by getting a large number of people to practice the scientific method laid out in this book and become rich. These people will show others the way. They will inspire them with a desire for real life, with the faith that it can be achieved, and with the purpose to actually achieve it.

For now, though, it's enough to know that neither the government you live under, nor the capitalist or competitive economic system, can keep you from getting rich. When you move onto the creative plane of thought, you will rise above all these things and become a citizen of a different kind of kingdom.

But remember that your thoughts must stay on that creative plane. You can never, even for a moment, let yourself believe that the supply is limited, or start acting on the moral level of competition.

Whenever you catch yourself falling back into old ways of thinking, correct yourself instantly. When you are in a competitive mindset, you lose the cooperation of the Universal Mind.

Don't spend time planning how you'll handle possible future emergencies, unless those necessary policies affect your actions today. You should be concerned with doing today's work perfectly, not with emergencies that might pop up tomorrow. You can handle those when they actually arrive.

Don't worry about how you'll overcome obstacles that might be looming on your business horizon, unless you clearly see that you need to change your course today to avoid them.

No matter how huge an obstacle might look from a distance, you will find that if you stay on the Certain Way, it will either disappear as you get closer, or a way over, through, or around it will reveal itself.

No combination of circumstances can defeat a person who is working toward wealth along strictly scientific lines. A person who obeys these laws cannot fail to get rich, any more than you can multiply two by two and fail to get four.

Don't waste anxious thoughts on possible disasters, obstacles, panics, or unfavorable circumstances. There is plenty of time to deal with those things when they actually present themselves right in front of you. You will find that every difficulty brings with it the exact tools needed to overcome it.

Guard your speech. Never speak about yourself, your affairs, or anything else in a discouraged or discouraging way.

Never admit the possibility of failure, or speak in a way that implies failure is even possible.

Never talk about times being hard or business being uncertain. Times may be hard and business may be doubtful for those operating on the competitive plane, but they can never be that way for you. You can create what you want, and you are above fear.

When others are having hard times and poor business, you will find your greatest opportunities.

Train yourself to view the world as something that is Becoming, something that is growing. View seeming evil as just something that is currently undeveloped. Always speak in terms of advancement. To do otherwise is to deny your faith, and to deny your faith is to lose it.

Never allow yourself to feel disappointed. You might expect to get a certain thing at a specific time and not get it then, and that will look like a failure to you.

But if you hold onto your faith, you will find that the failure is only an illusion.

Keep going in the Certain Way. If you don't receive that specific thing, you will receive something so much better that you will realize the seeming failure was actually a massive success.

A student of this science set his mind on making a certain business deal that seemed incredibly desirable at the time, and he worked for weeks to make it happen. When the crucial moment arrived, the deal fell through in a completely unexplainable way. It was as if some unseen force had been secretly working against him. But he wasn't disappointed. On the contrary, he thanked God that his desire had been overruled, and he kept going with a grateful mind. A few weeks later, an opportunity came his way that was so much better, he wouldn't have taken the first deal for anything in the world. He realized that a Mind that knew more than he did had prevented him from losing out on the greater good by getting tangled up with the lesser one.

That is how every seeming failure will work out for you, as long as you keep your faith, hold onto your purpose, maintain gratitude, and do everything that can be done each day in a successful manner.

When you experience a failure, it's because you haven't asked for enough. Keep going, and something much larger than what you were seeking will certainly come to you. Remember this.

You will not fail because you lack the necessary talent to do what you want to do. If you proceed exactly as I've directed, you will develop all the talent necessary to do your work.

It's not the purpose of this book to explain the science of cultivating talent, but it is just as certain and simple as the process of getting rich.

However, don't hesitate or hold back out of fear that you will fail for lack of ability when you reach a certain point. Keep right on going, and when you reach that point, the ability will be provided to you. The exact same Source of Ability that allowed the uneducated Abraham Lincoln to do the greatest work in government ever accomplished by one person is open to you. You can draw upon the Universal Mind for the wisdom you need to handle the responsibilities placed upon you. Proceed in full faith.

Study this book. Make it your constant companion until you have mastered all the ideas in it. While you are getting firmly grounded in this faith, it's best to give up most ordinary recreations and pleasures. Stay away from places where ideas that conflict with these are promoted in lectures or sermons. Don't read pessimistic or conflicting literature, and don't get into arguments about it. Do very little reading outside of the authors mentioned in the Preface. Spend the majority of your free time contemplating your vision, cultivating gratitude, and reading this book. It contains everything you need to know about the science of getting rich, and you will find all the essentials summarized in the following chapter.
