Chapter 13
Getting Into the Right Business

Success in any specific business depends in part on having a well-developed set of the specific skills required for that business.

Without good musical ability, no one can succeed as a music teacher. Without well-developed mechanical skills, no one can achieve great success in any mechanical trade. Without tact and commercial sense, no one can succeed in business. But simply having the required skills for your chosen profession well-developed doesn't guarantee you'll get rich. There are incredibly talented musicians who stay poor. There are blacksmiths, carpenters, and others with excellent mechanical skills who don't get rich. And there are merchants with great people skills who still fail.

Your various skills are like tools. It's essential to have good tools, but it's just as essential to use them in the Right Way. One person can take a sharp saw, a square, a good plane, and other tools, and build a beautiful piece of furniture. Another person can take those exact same tools, try to duplicate the piece, and produce a complete mess. That second person just doesn't know how to use good tools successfully.

The different abilities of your mind are the tools you must use to do the work that will make you rich. It will be easier for you to succeed if you enter a business for which you are already well-equipped with the right mental tools.

Generally speaking, you'll do best in the business that uses your strongest skills—the one you are naturally "best fitted" for. But there are exceptions to this, too. No one should feel their career is permanently locked in by the tendencies they were born with.

You can get rich in ANY business. If you don't have the right talent for it, you can develop that talent. It simply means you'll have to build your tools as you go, rather than limiting yourself to the ones you were born with. It will be EASIER for you to succeed in a career where you already have well-developed talents. But you CAN succeed in any career, because you can develop any basic talent. And there isn't a single talent out there that you don't possess at least the seeds of.

You'll get rich with the least amount of effort if you do what you are best suited for. But you'll get rich with the most satisfaction if you do what you truly WANT to do.

Doing what you want to do is what life is all about. There's no real satisfaction in living if we are forced to forever do things we don't like, and can never do the things we actually want to do. And it is absolutely certain that you can do what you want to do. The very fact that you have the desire to do it is proof that you have the power within you to achieve it.

Desire is simply power seeking expression.

The desire to play music is the musical power within you seeking expression and development. The desire to invent mechanical devices is the mechanical talent within you seeking expression and development.

Where there is no power—either developed or undeveloped—to do a thing, there is never any desire to do it. And where there is a strong desire to do a thing, it's solid proof that the power to do it is also strong, and only needs to be developed and applied in the Right Way.

All else being equal, it's best to choose the business for which you have the most developed talent. But if you have a burning desire to engage in a particular line of work, you should choose that work as your ultimate goal.

You can do what you want to do, and it is your right and privilege to pursue the business or career that will be most fulfilling and enjoyable to you.

You are not obligated to do what you don't like to do, and you shouldn't do it, except as a stepping stone to get you to where you do want to be.

If past mistakes have landed you in an undesirable business or environment, you might have to do things you don't like for a while. But you can make the experience pleasant by knowing that doing it is making it possible for you to eventually do what you truly want.

If you feel you're in the wrong career, don't rush into trying to find another one. The best way, generally, to change your business or environment is through personal growth.

Don't be afraid to make a sudden and massive change if the right opportunity presents itself, and after careful consideration, you feel it is the right opportunity. But never take sudden or drastic action when you are doubting whether it's the wise thing to do.

There is never any need to rush on the creative plane, and there is never a lack of opportunity.

When you step out of the competitive mindset, you'll understand that you never need to act in haste. No one else is going to beat you to the thing you want to do; there is more than enough for everyone. If one spot is taken, a different and better one will open up for you shortly. There is plenty of time. When you are in doubt, wait. Fall back on contemplating your vision, and boost your faith and purpose. Above all, in times of doubt and indecision, practice gratitude.

A day or two spent contemplating the vision of what you want, and offering sincere thanks that you are getting it, will bring your mind into such a close relationship with the Supreme that you won't make a mistake when you finally do act.

There is a Mind that knows everything there is to know. You can connect closely with this Mind through faith, the purpose to advance in life, and deep gratitude.

Mistakes happen from acting too quickly, acting in fear or doubt, or forgetting the Right Motive—which is more life for all, and less for none.

As you continue on the Certain Way, opportunities will come to you in increasing numbers. You will need to be very steady in your faith and purpose, and keep in close touch with the Universal Mind through reverent gratitude.

Do all that you can do in a perfect manner every day, but do it without rushing, worrying, or fearing. Go as fast as you can, but never hurry.

Remember that the moment you start to hurry, you stop being a creator and become a competitor again. You drop right back down to the old level of thinking.

Whenever you catch yourself hurrying, call a halt. Focus your attention back on the mental image of the thing you want, and start giving thanks that you are getting it. Practicing GRATITUDE will never fail to strengthen your faith and renew your purpose.
