[Chapter 10. Further Use of the Will.]

You can't keep a clear picture of wealth in your mind if you're always focusing on things that contradict that vision, whether those things are real or just in your imagination.

Don't talk about your past money problems, if you've had any. Don't even think about them. Don't talk about how poor your parents were, or how tough your early life was. If you do any of these things, you're mentally putting yourself in the category of the poor for that moment. This will definitely slow down the good things coming your way.

"Let the dead bury their dead," as Jesus said.

Put poverty and everything related to it completely behind you.

You've accepted a specific idea about how the universe works as true, and you're basing all your hopes for happiness on that idea being right. So, what do you gain by paying attention to ideas that go against it?

Don't read religious books that claim the world is ending soon. And don't read the writings of negative journalists and gloomy philosophers who say everything is going to hell.

The world isn't going to hell; it's moving towards God.

It's a wonderful process of becoming.

Sure, there might be a lot of unpleasant things in the world right now. But what's the point of focusing on them when they're definitely fading away? And when studying them only slows down their disappearance and keeps them around longer? Why spend your time and energy on things that are being naturally removed through evolutionary growth? You can only speed up their removal by helping that evolutionary growth along, as much as you can.

No matter how terrible the conditions might seem in some countries, regions, or specific places, you're just wasting your time and hurting your own opportunities by thinking about them.

You should focus on the world becoming wealthy.

Think about the wealth the world is gaining, instead of the poverty it's leaving behind. And remember, the only way you can help the world get rich is by getting rich yourself, using the creative method—not the competitive one.

Give your attention completely to wealth; ignore poverty.

Whenever you think or speak of those who are poor, think and speak of them as people who are becoming wealthy. See them as people who deserve congratulations, not pity. Then they and others will feel inspired and start looking for a way out of their situation.

Just because I'm telling you to dedicate all your time, mind, and thoughts to wealth, doesn't mean you should be greedy or selfish.

Becoming truly rich is the most noble goal you can have in life, because it includes everything else.

In a competitive mindset, the struggle to get rich is a ruthless fight for power over others. But when we tap into the creative mind, all of that changes.

Everything possible in terms of greatness, spiritual growth, service, and noble efforts comes from getting rich. All of it is made possible by using things.

If you don't have good physical health, you'll find that achieving it depends on you getting rich.

Only those who are free from money worries, and who have the resources to live a carefree life and practice good hygiene, can truly have and keep their health.

Moral and spiritual greatness is only possible for those who are above the competitive struggle for survival. And only those who are getting rich through creative thought are free from the negative effects of competition. If you truly want happiness at home, remember that love thrives best where there's refinement, deep thinking, and freedom from harmful influences. These things are only found where wealth is achieved through creative thought, without conflict or rivalry.

I repeat, you can't aim for anything greater or more noble than becoming rich. You must focus your attention on your mental picture of wealth. You need to exclude anything that might dim or cloud that vision.

You must learn to see the underlying truth in all things. You must see beneath all seemingly wrong conditions the Great One Life, always moving forward towards fuller expression and more complete happiness.

Here's the truth: There's no such thing as poverty. There is only wealth.

Some people remain in poverty because they are unaware that wealth is available to them. The best way to teach these people is by showing them the path to abundance through your own life and actions.

Others are poor because, even though they feel there's a way out, they're too mentally lazy to put in the effort needed to find that path and follow it. For these people, the very best thing you can do is to spark their desire by showing them the happiness that comes from being truly rich.

Still others are poor because, even though they have some understanding of science, they've become so overwhelmed and confused by a maze of metaphysical and occult theories that they don't know which direction to go. They try a mix of many systems and fail at all of them. Again, for these people, the very best thing to do is to show them the right way through your own life and actions. Remember, an ounce of doing is worth a pound of theorizing.

The very best thing you can do for the whole world is to make the most of yourself.

You can't serve God and humanity in a more effective way than by getting rich. That is, if you get rich using the creative method, not the competitive one.

Here's something else. We claim this book fully explains the principles of getting rich. If that's true, then you won't need to read any other book on the topic. This might sound narrow-minded or arrogant, but think about it: In math, there's only one scientific way to calculate: addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. No other method works. There's only one shortest distance between two points. There's only one scientific way to think. It's the way that leads directly and simply to your goal. No one has ever created a simpler or less complicated "system" than the one presented here. We've removed everything that isn't essential. When you start using this, put all other systems aside. Forget about them completely.

Read this book every day. Keep it with you. Memorize it. And don't think about other "systems" or theories. If you do, you'll start having doubts. Your thoughts will become uncertain and wavering. Then, you'll start failing.

Once you've succeeded and become rich, you can study other systems as much as you like. But until you're absolutely sure you've gotten what you want, don't read anything else on this topic. The only exceptions are the authors mentioned in the Preface.

Also, only read the most optimistic news comments about the world. Choose ones that match your vision.

Also, put off any investigations into the occult. Don't get involved with Theosophy, Spiritualism, or similar studies. It's very likely that the dead are still alive and nearby. But if they are, leave them alone. Mind your own business.

Wherever the spirits of the dead might be, they have their own work and problems to deal with. We have no right to interfere. We can't help them. It's also very doubtful if they can help us, or if we even have the right to take up their time if they could. Leave the dead and the afterlife alone. Solve your own problem: get rich. If you start getting involved with the occult, you'll create mental conflicts. These will definitely destroy your hopes.

So far, this chapter and the ones before it have led us to these basic facts:

There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made. In its original state, this stuff spreads through, enters, and fills all the empty spaces of the universe.

A thought, within this substance, creates the thing that the thought pictures.

People can form things in their thoughts. By impressing these thoughts onto the Formless Substance, they can cause the things they think about to be created.

To do this, you must shift from a competitive mindset to a creative one. You need to form a clear mental picture of what you want. Hold this picture in your thoughts with a firm PURPOSE to get it. Have unwavering FAITH that you *will* get what you want. Close your mind to anything that might shake your purpose, dim your vision, or weaken your faith.

In addition to all of this, we will now see that you must live and act in a Certain Way.