CHAPTER XVII. SUMMARY OF THE SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH.


There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which, in
its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of
the universe.

A thought in this substance produces the thing that is imaged by the
thought.

Man can form things in his thought, and by impressing his thought upon
formless substance can cause the thing he thinks about to be created.

In order to do this, man must pass from the competitive to the creative
mind; otherwise he cannot be in harmony with the Formless Intelligence,
which is always creative and never competitive in spirit.

Man may come into full harmony with the Formless Substance by
entertaining a lively and sincere gratitude for the blessings
it bestows upon him. Gratitude unifies the mind of man with the
intelligence of Substance, so that man’s thoughts are received by
the Formless. Man can remain upon the creative plane only by uniting
himself with the Formless Intelligence through a deep and continuous
feeling of gratitude.

Man must form a clear and definite mental image of the things he wishes
to have, to do, or to become; and he must hold this mental image in
his thoughts, while being deeply grateful to the Supreme that all
his desires are granted to him. The man who wishes to get rich must
spend his leisure hours in contemplating his Vision, and in earnest
thanksgiving that the reality is being given to him. Too much stress
cannot be laid on the importance of frequent contemplation of the
mental image, coupled with unwavering faith and devout gratitude. This
is the process by which the impression is given to the Formless, and
the creative forces set in motion.

The creative energy works through the established channels of natural
growth, and of the industrial and social order. All that is included
in his mental image will surely be brought to the man who follows the
instructions given above, and whose faith does not waver. What he wants
will come to him through the ways of established trade and commerce.

In order to receive his own when it shall come to him, man must be
active; and this activity can only consist in more than filling his
present place. He must keep in mind the Purpose to get rich through
the realization of his mental image. And he must do, every day, all
that can be done that day, taking care to do each act in a successful
manner. He must give to every man a use value in excess of the cash
value he receives, so that each transaction makes for more life; and
he must so hold the Advancing Thought that the impression of Increase
will be communicated to all with whom he comes in contact.

The men and women who practice the foregoing instructions will
certainly get rich; and the riches they receive will be in exact
proportion to the definiteness of their vision, the fixity of their
purpose, the steadiness of their faith, and the depth of their
gratitude.

       *       *       *       *       *

FURTHER AIDS TOWARD GETTING RICH RIGHT

THE NAUTILUS is published monthly for the express purpose of making
Men and Women Who Can Do What They Will To Do. It abounds in practical
ideas and in the bright inspiration that impels you to USE the ideas.
Use it as first aid!

Wallace D. Wattles, who wrote this book, teaches “Constructive Science”
in every number of the magazine. How to think so as to PROMOTE YOURSELF
is what you want to know. He teaches it!

Elizabeth and William E. Towne teach it, too. They are the editors and
owners of THE NAUTILUS, and their success is worth knowing about and
learning from.

And Thomas Dreier, of the Sheldon School of Salesmanship, writes for
NAUTILUS on business growing. So does Frank Andrews Fall, of the
University of New York. And several others. These folks know how. GET
IN TOUCH with success and successful people through NAUTILUS.

Then there is our Success Department, where everybody is invited to say
his say, and prizes are given for best letters.

THE NAUTILUS teaches and inspires health, wealth, and happiness in ALL
departments of life.

Don’t miss Wallace D. Wattles’ great new serial story, “As a Grain of
Mustard Seed,” which will begin in an early number of the magazine.

Send $1.00 for a year’s subscription to THE NAUTILUS, with a copy of
“Making The Man Who Can,” and “Marital Unrest: a New Remedy,” both by
Wallace D. Wattles. Or, send 10 cents for a three months’ trial and a
copy of “Marital Unrest.”

Do you want more books on how to succeed? Read Bruce McClelland’s
“Prosperity Through Thought Force,” price, $1.00, to which Ells Wheeler
Wilcox gave nearly a page of space in the New York Journal; and read
“How to Grow Success,” by Elizabeth Towne, 50c. And don’t you want to
read Wallace D. Wattles’ “New Science of Living and Healing,” price,
50c.? Address

ELIZABETH TOWNE, Dept. TS, HOLYOKE, MASS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Punctuation has been made consistent.

Variations in spelling and hyphenation were retained as they appear in
the original publication.

The following change has been made:

p. 87: purpose changed to propose (who propose with)





End of Project Gutenberg's The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace D. Wattles