Chapter 18
Concerning The Way In Which Princes Should Keep Faith

Everyone agrees that it is praiseworthy for a prince to keep his word and live with integrity rather than deception. Even so, our experience shows that the princes who have accomplished great things did not care much about keeping their promises. They knew how to trick men's minds with cunning. In the end, they defeated those who relied on honesty. You must understand there are two ways to fight: by law or by force. The first method belongs to men, while the second belongs to beasts. But since the first method is often not enough, you must sometimes use the second. Therefore, a prince must know how to act like both a beast and a man. Ancient writers taught this lesson to princes in a hidden way. They wrote about how Achilles and many other ancient princes were given to Chiron the Centaur to be raised and trained. Having a teacher who was half beast and half man means one simple thing. A prince must know how to use both of these natures, and one cannot survive without the other. Since a prince is forced to know how to act like a beast, he must choose to be both a fox and a lion. The lion cannot protect itself from traps, and the fox cannot defend itself against wolves. So, you must be a fox to recognize the traps, and a lion to scare off the wolves. Those who only act like a lion do not know what they are doing. Because of this, a wise ruler cannot and should not keep his word when doing so would be used against him, and when the reasons that made him make the promise no longer exist. If all men were completely good, this rule would be wrong. But since men are bad and will not keep their promises to you, you are not bound to keep your promises to them. A prince will never run out of legitimate excuses to break his word. We could give endless modern examples of this, showing how many treaties and promises have become useless and empty because princes broke their faith. The one who has known best how to play the fox has always succeeded the most.

But it is necessary to know how to disguise this nature well. You must be a great liar and a hypocrite. Men are so simple, and they are so focused on their present needs, that a deceiver will always find someone willing to be deceived. I cannot stay silent about one recent example. Pope Alexander the Sixth did nothing but deceive people. He never thought of doing anything else, yet he always found victims. No man was ever more convincing. No man ever swore greater oaths to prove a point, and no man ever kept his promises less. Even so, his deceptions always worked exactly as he wanted, because he fully understood this side of human nature.

Therefore, a prince does not actually need to have all the good qualities I just listed. However, it is absolutely essential that he appears to have them. In fact, I will dare to say this: having those qualities and always acting on them is dangerous, but appearing to have them is useful. You should seem merciful, faithful, humane, religious, and honest. You should even be these things. But your mind must be so prepared that, if you need to stop being these things, you know exactly how to switch to the opposite behavior.

You have to understand that a prince, especially a new one, cannot observe all the rules that make men seem good. To protect his state, he is often forced to act against loyalty, friendship, humanity, and religion. Because of this, he must have a mind ready to shift depending on how the winds and changes of Fortune force him. As I said before, he should not turn away from doing good if he can avoid it. But if he is forced to do wrong, he must know exactly how to do it.

For this reason, a prince must be very careful. He should never let anything slip from his lips that is not filled with those five good qualities. To anyone who sees and hears him, he must appear completely merciful, faithful, humane, honest, and religious. There is nothing more important than appearing to have this final quality of religion. In general, men judge more by their eyes than by their hands. Everyone can see you, but very few can actually touch you. Everyone sees what you appear to be, but few really know what you are. Those few will not dare to oppose the opinion of the majority, especially when the majority has the majesty of the state defending them. When it comes to the actions of all men, and especially of princes where there is no court to appeal to, people judge by the final result.

For that reason, let a prince focus on conquering and keeping his state. The methods he uses will always be judged as honorable, and everyone will praise him. The common people are always tricked by appearances and by how things turn out. In this world, there is nothing but the common people. The few only find a place when the majority has nowhere else to turn.

There is a certain prince of our own time whom it is better not to name. He preaches nothing but peace and good faith, but he is the greatest enemy of both. If he had actually kept either his peace or his promises, he would have lost his reputation and his kingdom many times over.
