Chapter 2. Whom the Gods Would Destroy

Andre-Louis settled down whole-heartedly to his new profession, just as he had done when he joined the Binet troupe. Necessity had driven him into this work, and it provided effective concealment from anyone who might want to harm him. This profession might have brought him to consider himself a man of action at last, although in reality it did not. He had not ceased to be a man of thought. The events of the spring and summer months of that year 1789 in Paris provided him with abundant matter for reflection. He read there in the raw what is perhaps the most amazing page in the history of human development. In the end, he was forced to the conclusion that all his early preconceptions had been wrong. He realized that it was the exalted, passionate enthusiasts like Vilmorin who had been right.

I suspect he actually took pride in the fact that he had been mistaken. He complacently attributed his error to the idea that he had been too sane and logical to gauge the depths of human insanity now revealed.

He watched the growth of hunger and the increasing poverty and distress of Paris during that spring. He assigned it to its proper cause, along with the patience with which the people bore it. The world of France was in a state of hushed, paralyzed expectancy. They were waiting for the States-General to assemble and for centuries of tyranny to end. Industry had come to a standstill because of this expectancy. The stream of trade had dwindled to a trickle. Men would not buy or sell until they clearly saw how the genius of the Swiss banker, M. Necker, would deliver them from this mess. The men of the people were thrown out of work because of this paralysis of affairs. They were left to starve with their wives and children.

Andre-Louis looked on and smiled grimly. So far he was right. The sufferers were always the working class. The men who sought to make this revolution were the electors. Here in Paris, as elsewhere, they were men of substance, notable bourgeois citizens, and wealthy traders. These men despised the common rabble and envied the privileged class. They talked largely of equality, but they meant an ascending equality that would elevate them to the level of the gentry. Meanwhile, the working class perished of want in the slums.

The deputies arrived at last in the month of May. Andre-Louis' friend Le Chapelier was prominent among them, and the States-General were inaugurated at Versailles. Affairs began to become interesting at that point. It was then that Andre-Louis began to seriously doubt the soundness of the views he had held before.

The royal proclamation had gone forth decreeing that the deputies of the Third Estate should number twice as many as those of the other two orders combined. Andre-Louis had believed that the large number of votes thus assured to the Third Estate made their promised reforms inevitable.

But he had reckoned without the power of the privileged orders over the proud Austrian queen. Her power over the obese, passive, and irresolute king. Andre-Louis could understand that the privileged orders would fight to defend their privileges. Men are burdened by greed and will never willingly surrender their possessions, whether they hold them justly or unjustly. But Andre-Louis was surprised by the complete stupidity of the methods the Privileged used for battle. They opposed reason and philosophy with brute force. They fought ideas with battalions of foreign mercenaries, as if ideas could be impaled on bayonets!

The war had begun between the Privileged class and the Court on one side, and the Assembly and the People on the other.

The Third Estate contained itself and waited. They waited with the patience of nature for a month. The paralysis of business was now complete, and the skeleton hand of famine took a firmer grip on Paris. They waited a month while the Privileged class gradually assembled an army in Versailles to intimidate them. This army consisted of fifteen regiments, nine of which were Swiss and German. They also mounted a park of artillery outside the building where the deputies sat. But the deputies refused to be intimidated. They refused to see the guns and foreign uniforms. They refused to see anything except the purpose for which they had been brought together by royal proclamation.

They waited like this until the 10th of June. Then the great thinker and metaphysician, the Abbe Sieyes, gave the signal. He said, "It is time to cut the cable."

The opportunity came soon, at the very beginning of July. M. du Chatelet was a harsh and haughty disciplinarian. He proposed to transfer the eleven French Guards who were under arrest from the military jail of the Abbaye to the filthy prison of Bicetre. Bicetre was reserved for thieves and felons of the lowest order. Word of that intention spread, and the people at last met violence with violence. A mob of four thousand strong broke into the Abbaye. They freed the eleven guardsmen and all the other prisoners, except for one man they discovered to be a thief. They put the thief back in his cell.

That was open revolt at last, and the Privileged class knew how to deal with revolt. They planned to strangle this mutinous Paris in the iron grip of the foreign regiments. Measures were quickly organized. Old Marechal de Broglie took control, with Besenval as his second-in-command. De Broglie was a veteran of the Seven Years' War and was filled with a soldier's contempt for civilians. He believed that the sight of a uniform would be enough to restore peace and order. The foreign regiments were stationed in the areas around Paris. Their very names were an irritation to the Parisians, including the regiments of Reisbach, Diesbach, Nassau, Esterhazy, and Roehmer. Reinforcements of Swiss guards were sent to the Bastille. The menacing mouths of loaded cannons had already been visible between the fortress walls since the 30th of June.

The electors addressed the King once more on the 10th of July to request the withdrawal of the troops. They were answered the next day that the troops were there to defend the liberties of the Assembly! The following day was a Sunday. The philanthropist Dr. Guillotin came from the Assembly, of which he was a member, to assure the electors of Paris that all was well. His philanthropic machine of painless death would soon find plenty of work. For now he insisted that appearances were deceiving and that Necker was more securely in power than ever. He did not know the truth at the very moment he was speaking so confidently. The frequently dismissed and frequently recalled M. Necker had just been dismissed yet again by the hostile group around the Queen. The Privileged class wanted conclusive measures, and they were going to get them.

At the same time, another philanthropist and doctor named Jean-Paul Mara was writing a warning. He was of Italian extraction but was better known as Marat, the French form of the name he adopted. He was also a man of letters who had spent some years in England publishing works on sociology. He wrote:

"Have a care! Consider what would be the fatal effect of a rebellious movement. If you should have the misfortune to give way to that, you will be treated as people in revolt, and blood will flow."

Andre-Louis was in the gardens of the Palais Royal on that Sunday morning when the news of Necker's dismissal spread. The Palais Royal was a universal gathering place full of shops, puppet-shows, circuses, cafes, gaming houses, and brothels. The news carried dismay and fury with it. The people interpreted Necker's dismissal as the triumph of the party hostile to them. It sounded the death knell of all hope for redressing their wrongs.

He watched a slight young man with a pock-marked face leap onto a table outside the Cafe de Foy. The man's face was redeemed from utter ugliness by a pair of magnificent eyes. He held a drawn sword in his hand and cried out, "To arms!" The cry imposed a silence of astonishment. Then this young man poured out a flood of inflammatory eloquence. His voice was marred at times by a stutter. He told the people that the Germans on the Champ de Mars would enter Paris that night to butcher the inhabitants. "Let us wear a cockade!" he cried. He tore a leaf from a tree to serve his purpose, creating the green cockade of hope.

Enthusiasm swept the crowd. It was a diverse crowd made up of men and women of every class, from vagabond to nobleman, and from prostitute to fashionable lady. The trees were stripped of their leaves, and the green cockade was soon flaunted on almost every head.

"You are caught between two fires," the young man raved on in his stuttering voice. "You are between the Germans on the Champ de Mars and the Swiss in the Bastille. To arms, then! To arms!"

Excitement boiled over. Someone brought out a bust of Necker from a neighboring waxworks show. Soon, they also brought out a bust of the Duke of Orleans. The Duke was a comedian who had his own political party. He was as ready as any other budding opportunist to take advantage of the moment for his own power. The bust of Necker was draped with black crepe.

Andre-Louis looked on and grew afraid. Marat's pamphlet had impressed him. It expressed the same thoughts Andre-Louis had shared with the mob at Rennes over half a year ago. He felt this crowd must be restrained. That hot-headed and irresponsible stutterer would have the town in a blaze by night unless someone did something. The young man was a briefless lawyer from the Palais named Camille Desmoulins, who would later become famous. He leapt down from his table, still waving his sword and shouting, "To arms! Follow me!" Andre-Louis advanced to occupy the improvised stage the stutterer had just vacated. He wanted to make an effort to counteract that inflammatory performance. He pushed through the crowd and suddenly came face to face with a tall, beautifully dressed man. The man's handsome face was set sternly, and his great dark eyes smoldered with suppressed anger.

They stood face to face for a long moment, each looking into the eyes of the other. The jostling crowd streamed past them unheeded. Then Andre-Louis laughed.

"That fellow also has a very dangerous gift of eloquence, Marquis," he said. "In fact, there are a number of such men in France today. They grow from the soil, which you and your kind have watered with the blood of the martyrs of liberty. Soon it may be your blood instead. The soil is parched and thirsty for it."

"You gallows-bird!" the Marquis answered. "The police will handle you. I shall tell the Lieutenant-General that you are in Paris."

"My God, man!" cried Andre-Louis. "Will you never get sense? Will you talk of Lieutenant-Generals when Paris itself is likely to tumble about your ears or catch fire under your feet? Raise your voice, Marquis. Denounce me here to this crowd. You will make a hero of me in such an hour as this. Or shall I denounce you? I think I will. I think it is high time you received what you deserve. Hey! You people, listen to me! Let me present you to..."

A rush of men slammed into him and swept him along with them despite his best efforts. The crowd separated him from the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr, whom he had met so oddly. Andre-Louis tried to fight against the human torrent. The Marquis was caught in an eddy of the crowd and remained where he had been. Andre-Louis' last glimpse of him was of a man smiling with tight lips in an ugly grin.

Meanwhile, the gardens were emptying out in the wake of that stuttering firebrand who had created the green cockade. The human torrent poured into the Rue de Richelieu. Andre-Louis had no choice but to let himself be carried along by it, at least as far as the Rue du Hasard. He edged his way out of the crowd there. He had no wish to be crushed to death or to take any further part in the madness. He slipped down the street and arrived home at the deserted fencing academy. There were no pupils today. Even M. des Amis had gone out, just like Andre-Louis, to seek news of what was happening at Versailles.

This was not a normal state of affairs at the Academy of Bertrand des Amis. No matter what else in Paris might have been at a standstill lately, the fencing academy had flourished like never before. Usually, both the master and his assistant were busy from morning until dusk. Andre-Louis was already being paid for the lessons he gave. The master allowed him to keep half of the fee in each case, an arrangement the assistant found very profitable. The academy normally took a half-holiday on Sundays. But on this particular Sunday, the city was in such a state of suspense and ferment that no pupils had appeared by eleven o'clock. Both des Amis and Andre-Louis had gone out. They were very good friends by now, and they took leave of each other lightly. Little did they know that they would never meet again in this world.

There was bloodshed that day in Paris. A detachment of dragoons waited on the Place Vendome for the crowd that Andre-Louis had just escaped. The horsemen swept down upon the mob and dispersed it. They smashed the wax statue of M. Necker and killed one man on the spot. The victim was an unfortunate French Guard who had stood his ground. That was only the beginning. Besenval brought his Swiss guards up from the Champ de Mars as a consequence. He organized them in battle formation on the Champs Elysees with four pieces of artillery. He stationed his dragoons in the Place Louis XV. That evening, an enormous crowd streamed along the Champs Elysees and the Tuileries Gardens. They looked at these warlike preparations with alarm. They cast insults at the foreign mercenaries and threw some stones. Besenval lost his head, or perhaps he was acting under orders, and he sent for his dragoons to disperse the crowd. But the crowd was too dense to be cleared out in this way. It was impossible for the horsemen to move without crushing people, and several were indeed crushed. The dragoons, led by the Prince de Lambesc, then advanced into the Tuileries Gardens. The outraged crowd met them with a barrage of stones and bottles. Lambesc gave the order to fire, and a stampede broke out. The indignant people poured out of the Tuileries and through the city. They spread the story of German cavalry trampling women and children. Now they took up the call to arms with grim seriousness, echoing the cry raised at noon by Desmoulins in the Palais Royal.

The victims were gathered up and carried away. Among them was Bertrand des Amis. Like all men who lived by the sword, he had been an ardent upholder of the nobility. Now he had been trampled to death under the hooves of foreign horsemen, who were launched by the nobility and led by a nobleman.

Andre-Louis waited that evening on the second floor of No. 13 Rue du Hasard for his friend and master to return. Instead, four commoners arrived carrying his broken body. Bertrand des Amis was one of the earliest victims of the Revolution, which was now launched in earnest.
