Chapter 6. POLITICIANS

One morning in August, the academy on the Rue du Hasard was visited by Le Chapelier. He was accompanied by a remarkably striking man. His enormous height and scarred face seemed vaguely familiar to André-Louis. He was a little over thirty years old, with small bright eyes buried in a massive face. His cheekbones were prominent, and his nose was crooked, as if it had been broken by a punch. Another injury had left his mouth almost shapeless, from a time when a bull had gored him in the face during his youth. To make his appearance even more intimidating, his cheeks were heavily pitted with smallpox scars. He dressed untidily in a long scarlet coat that fell almost to his ankles, paired with stained buckskin breeches and boots with turned-down tops. His less-than-clean shirt was open at the throat, with a limp collar falling over an untied cravat. This exposed a muscular neck that rose like a pillar from his broad shoulders. In his left hand, he swung a cane thick enough to be a club, and his beige, cone-shaped hat featured a revolutionary cockade. He carried himself with an aggressive, dominant attitude, throwing his large head back as if he were constantly challenging the world.

Le Chapelier, who looked very serious, introduced him to André-Louis.

"This is Monsieur Danton. He is a fellow lawyer and President of the Cordeliers, whom you have probably heard of."

Of course, André-Louis had heard of him. By that point, everyone had.

Looking at him closely, André-Louis wondered why almost all the leading revolutionaries had smallpox scars. Mirabeau, the journalist Desmoulins, the philanthropist Marat, the small-town lawyer Robespierre from Arras, this intimidating man Danton. Several others all carried the marks of the disease. He almost began to wonder if there was some connection between the two. Did a bout of smallpox produce some psychological change that showed itself in revolutionary politics?

He brushed aside this pointless thought. Or rather, it was shattered by the shocking, thunderous roar of Danton's voice.

"This damn Chapelier has told me about you. He claims you are a patriotic bastard."

André-Louis was less surprised by the man's tone than by the foul language this giant freely used in his very first sentence to a complete stranger. He burst out laughing. There was nothing else he could do.

"If he told you that, he told you a bit more than the truth! I am a patriot. Modesty forces me to deny the rest."

"You are a joker too, it seems," the other man roared, but he laughed anyway. The sheer volume of his laughter rattled the windows. "I mean no offense. That is just how I am."

"What a pity," André-Louis said.

This response caught the king of the markets off guard. "What is this, Chapelier? Is your friend here putting on airs?"

The neat Breton lawyer looked like a perfect gentleman compared to his companion. However, his direct manner was just as brutal as Danton's, even without the crude language. He shrugged as he answered.

"He simply does not like your manners, which is not surprising at all. They are terrible."

"Oh, nonsense! You damn Bretons are all the same. Let us get down to business. Have you heard what happened in the Assembly yesterday? You have not? Good God, where do you live? Have you heard that this scoundrel who calls himself the King of France recently allowed Austrian troops to cross French soil? They are on their way to crush the people fighting for freedom in Belgium. Have you heard that, by any chance?"

"Yes," André-Louis said coldly. He hid his annoyance at the man's bullying tone. "I have heard that."

"Oh! And what do you think of it?" The giant loomed over him with his hands on his hips.

André-Louis turned away to look at Le Chapelier.

"I do not think I understand. Did you bring this gentleman here to interrogate my political beliefs?"

"In the name of God! He is as prickly as a damn porcupine!" Danton complained.

"No, no." Le Chapelier tried to calm things down, acting as a buffer against his irritating friend. "We need your help, André. Danton here thinks you are exactly the man we need. Listen now."

"That is right. You tell him," Danton agreed. "You both speak the same delicate kind of French. He will probably understand you."

Le Chapelier ignored the interruption and continued. "The King has clearly violated the rights of a country trying to build a free constitution. This action has destroyed any generous illusions we still held. Some people even go so far as to call the King the sworn enemy of France. But that is an extreme view, of course."

"Who says so?" Danton flared up. He swore aggressively to show his complete disagreement.

Le Chapelier waved a hand to quiet him and went on.

"In any case, this incident was more than enough to stir up the Assembly again, on top of everything else. It is open war between the Third Estate and the Privileged class."

"Has it ever been anything else?"

"Perhaps not, but it has taken on a new form. You must have heard about the duel between Lameth and the Duc de Castries?"

"A minor incident."

"The results were minor, but it could have been much worse. Now Mirabeau is challenged and insulted at every single meeting. But he just keeps going, staying perfectly cool and wise. Others are not so careful. They answer insults with more insults, and blows with blows. Blood is being spilled in private duels. These noble swordsmen have turned the whole thing into an organized system."

André-Louis nodded. He was thinking of Philippe de Vilmorin. "Yes," he said. "It is an old trick of theirs. It is very simple and direct, just like they are. I am only surprised they did not think of this system earlier. It might have worked better back in the early days of the States-General at Versailles. Now, it is a bit too late."

"But they are trying to make up for lost time, damn it!" Danton shouted. "These noble bullies are throwing challenges left and right. They are challenging poor lawyers who have never fought with anything sharper than a quill pen. It is just damn murder. But if I went among those noble gentlemen and smashed a few empty heads with this stick of mine, or snapped a few aristocratic necks with these fingers God gave me, the law would hang me. And this is in a country fighting for freedom! Damn it all, I am not even allowed to keep my hat on in the theater. But those bastards can get away with murder!"

"He is right," Le Chapelier said. "The situation has become impossible to tolerate. Two days ago, Monsieur d'Ambly threatened Mirabeau with his cane right in front of the whole Assembly. Yesterday, Monsieur de Faussigny jumped up and gave a speech urging his fellow nobles to commit murder. He actually asked why they did not just attack us scoundrels with swords in hand. Those were his exact words."

"It is certainly much simpler than passing laws," André-Louis noted.

"Lagron, the representative from Ancenis in the Loire, shouted an answer that we could not quite hear. As he was leaving the riding school where we meet, one of those bullies grossly insulted him. Lagron merely used his elbow to push past the man. The fellow immediately yelled that he had been struck and issued a challenge. They fought early this morning in the Champs-Élysées. Lagron was killed. He was deliberately run through the stomach by a man who fought like a professional fencing master. Poor Lagron did not even own a sword. He had to borrow one just to show up for the duel."

André-Louis clenched his hands and set his jaw. His mind was constantly on Vilmorin, and this exact scenario was happening all over again, down to the last detail. A wave of intense anger swept over him. Danton's small eyes watched him closely.

"Well? And what do you think of that? Nobility has its obligations, right? The point is, we need to oblige those bastards right back. We have to pay them back in their own currency and fight them with their own weapons. We need to wipe them out and throw those murderers into the abyss using the exact same methods."

"But how?"

"How? For God's sake, did I not just say it?"

"That is exactly where we need your help," Le Chapelier added. "There must be some very patriotic men among your best students. Monsieur Danton believes that a small group of them, maybe a half-dozen led by you, could teach these bullies a harsh lesson."

André-Louis frowned.

"And exactly how did Monsieur Danton think this could be done?"

Monsieur Danton answered for himself with intense passion.

"Like this! We station you at the riding school right when the Assembly finishes for the day. We point out the six worst bloodletters, and we let you loose to insult them before they can insult any of our representatives. Then, the next morning, we have six damn bloodletters professionally bled dry themselves. That will give the rest of them something to think about. It will give them a hell of a lot to think about! If necessary, we can repeat the dose until they are fully cured. If you kill the bastards, all the better."

He paused, his pale face flushed with the excitement of his own plan. André-Louis stared at him with an unreadable expression.

"Well, what do you say to that?"

"I say it is highly creative." André-Louis turned away to look out the window.

"And is that all you think about it?"

"I will not tell you my other thoughts because you probably would not understand them. For you, Monsieur Danton, I can at least make the excuse that you do not know me. But you, Isaac, to bring this man here with such a proposal!"

Le Chapelier was overwhelmed with embarrassment. "I admit I hesitated," he apologized. "But Monsieur Danton would not take my word that this idea might not suit your tastes."

"I certainly would not!" Danton shouted, interrupting him. He turned on Le Chapelier, waving his massive arms. "You told me this gentleman was a patriot. True patriotism has no moral limits. You call this delicate dancing master a patriot?"

"Monsieur, would your patriotism make you agree to become an assassin?"

"Of course it would. Have I not already told you? Have I not said I would gladly go among them with my club and crush them like fleas?"

"Then why not do it?"

"Why not? Because I would get myself hanged! Have I not said that too?"

"But what about being a patriot? If you truly believe your country would benefit from your death, why not jump into the abyss like a sacrificial hero?"

Monsieur Danton looked incredibly frustrated. "Because my country will benefit much more if I stay alive."

"Please allow me, monsieur, to suffer from the same kind of vanity."

"You? But where would the danger be for you? You would do your work disguised as a legal duel, exactly like they do."

"Have you considered, monsieur, that the law will hardly treat a professional fencing master who kills his opponent as a regular duelist? Especially if it can be proven that the fencing master provoked the fight on purpose?"

"Oh! In the name of God!" Monsieur Danton puffed out his cheeks and spoke with complete contempt. "So it all comes down to this. You are afraid!"

"You can think that if you want. You can believe I am afraid to do something sneaky and treacherous, even though a bragging patriot like yourself is afraid to do it openly and honestly. I have my own reasons. But that one should be enough for you."

Danton gasped. Then he cursed more creatively and intensely than ever before.

"By God, you are right," he admitted, to André-Louis's total surprise. "You are right, and I am wrong. I am just as bad a patriot as you are. I am a coward on top of it." He called upon the entire heavens to witness his self-criticism. "Only, you see, my life actually counts for something. If they catch me and hang me, well, that is a huge loss! Monsieur, we simply must find another way. Please forgive the intrusion. Goodbye!" He held out his massive hand.

Le Chapelier stood there hesitating, looking defeated.

"You understand, André? I am sorry that..."

"Please do not say another word. Come and see me again soon. I would ask you to stay, but it is striking nine o'clock, and my first student is about to arrive."

"I would not allow it anyway," Danton said. "Together, we have to figure out the puzzle of how to wipe out the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr and his friends."

"Who?"

The question cracked like a pistol shot just as Danton was turning to leave. The sharp tone stopped him in his tracks. He turned back around, and Le Chapelier turned with him.

"I said the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr."

"What does he have to do with the proposal you just made to me?"

"Him? Why, he is the head bloodletter of them all."

Le Chapelier added quietly, "He is the one who killed Lagron."

"He is not a friend of yours, is he?" Danton wondered.

"And it is La Tour d'Azyr you want me to kill?" André-Louis asked very slowly. He spoke like a man who was deeply considering the idea in his mind.

"That is exactly right," Danton said. "And I can assure you, it is not a job for a beginner."

"Ah, but this changes things," André-Louis said, thinking out loud. "This is a very great temptation."

"Well then...?" The giant took a step toward him again.

"Wait!" André-Louis held up his hand. With his chin resting on his chest, he paced over to the window, lost in thought.

Le Chapelier and Danton exchanged looks and then watched him, waiting while he thought it over.

At first, he almost wondered why he had not already thought of a plan like this to settle his long-standing score with the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr. What was the point of acquiring all this incredible fencing skill if he could not use it to avenge Vilmorin and keep Aline safe from her own ambitions? It would be so easy to find La Tour d'Azyr, insult him fatally, and force a duel. Today, it would be murder, just as treacherous as when La Tour d'Azyr had killed Philippe de Vilmorin. The tables were turned now, and André-Louis could go to a duel without any doubt about who would win. He dismissed that moral obstacle very quickly. But there was still the legal problem he had just explained to Danton. The law still existed in France. It was the same law that had protected La Tour d'Azyr from him. It would move quickly to punish André-Louis if he did the same thing. Then, suddenly, as if struck by inspiration, he saw the perfect solution. It was a plan that would bring La Tour d'Azyr to perfect poetic justice. It would force the arrogant man to throw himself on André-Louis's sword, with all the blame for the fight falling entirely on the Marquis himself.

He turned back to them, and they saw that he was very pale, and his large dark eyes were glowing with a strange intensity.

"There will probably be some trouble finding a replacement for this poor Lagron," he said. "Our fellow countrymen will not be very eager to offer themselves up to the swords of the privileged nobles."

"That is true enough," Le Chapelier said gloomily. Then, as if he suddenly understood what André-Louis was thinking, he cried out. "André! Would you..."

"It is exactly what I was considering. It would give me a legitimate seat in the Assembly. If your men like La Tour d'Azyr choose to come after me then, well, their blood will be on their own hands. I will certainly not do anything to stop them." He smiled a strange, curious smile. "I am just a rascal trying to be honest. I am always Scaramouche, a creature of clever arguments. Do you think the people of Ancenis would accept me as their representative?"

"Will they accept Omnes Omnibus as their representative?" Le Chapelier laughed, his face lighting up with excitement. "Ancenis will be overwhelmed with pride! It is not a major city like Rennes or Nantes, as you could have had if you wanted. But it gives you a voice for all of Brittany."

"I suppose I would have to travel to Ancenis."

"There is no need for that at all. A single letter from me to the local government, and they will confirm you immediately. You do not even have to leave this room. The whole thing can be finished in two weeks at the most. So, is it settled?"

André-Louis thought for another moment. He had his academy to worry about. But he could arrange for Le Duc and Galoche to run it for him while he directed them and offered advice. After all, Le Duc had become a highly skilled fencing master, and he was a very reliable man. If they needed to, they could hire a third assistant.

"Let it be so," he finally said.

Le Chapelier shook his hand warmly and began showering him with rapid congratulations, until the giant in the red coat at the door interrupted them.

"What exactly does this mean for our actual plan?" he asked. "Does it mean that once you are a representative, you will have no moral issues with skewering the Marquis?"

"If the Marquis offers himself up to be skewered, which I have no doubt he will."

"I see the distinction," Monsieur Danton sneered. "You have a very clever mind." He turned back to Le Chapelier. "What did you say he was before all this? A lawyer, right?"

"Yes, I was a lawyer, and after that, a traveling actor."

"And this is the final result!"

"As you say. But do you realize that you and I are not so different after all?"

"What do you mean?"

"Once, just like you, I went around trying to convince other people to kill the man I wanted dead. You will say I was a coward, of course."

Le Chapelier started to step between them as a dark look crossed the giant's face. But the anger quickly faded, and a booming laugh shook the long room once more.

"You have managed to hit me twice, and in the exact same spot! Oh, you know how to fence with your words, my boy. We really should be friends. I live on the Rue des Cordeliers. Any scoundrel on the street can tell you where Danton stays. Desmoulins lives on the floor right below me. Come and visit us some evening. We always keep a bottle ready for a friend."
