Chapter 16: Sunrise

Andre-Louis took the air the next morning on the terrace at Meudon. It was very early. The newly risen sun turned the lingering dewdrops on the lawn into sparkling diamonds. Down in the valley, five miles away, the morning mists were rising over Paris. Yet, despite the early hour, the house on the hill was already awake. It was bustling with preparation for their upcoming departure.

Andre-Louis had made it safely out of Paris last night with his mother and Aline. Today, they were all going to set out for Coblenz.

Andre-Louis sauntered there with his hands clasped behind him and his head hunched between his shoulders, for his life had never been richer in material for reflection. Presently, Aline came through one of the glass doors from the library.

"You are up early," she greeted him.

"Faith, yes. I have not been to bed. No," he assured her, in answer to her exclamation. "I spent the night, or what was left of it, sitting at the window thinking."

"My poor Andre!"

"You describe me perfectly. I am very poor, because I know nothing and I understand nothing. It is not a calamitous condition until it is realized. Then..." He threw out his arms and let them fall again. She noticed his face was very drawn and haggard.

She paced with him along the old granite balustrade, where the geraniums flung their mantle of green and scarlet.

"Have you decided what you are going to do?" she asked him.

"I have decided that I have no choice. I, too, must emigrate. I am lucky to be able to do so. I am lucky to have found no one during yesterday's chaos in Paris to whom I could report myself as I foolishly desired, otherwise I might no longer be armed with these." He drew from his pocket the powerful passport of the Commission of Twelve. It commanded all Frenchmen to lend him any assistance he might require and warned those who might think of hindering him that they did so at their own peril. He spread it before her. "With this, I will conduct you all safely to the frontier. Over the frontier, M. de Kercadiou and Mme. de Plougastel will have to conduct me, and then we shall be quits."

"Quits?" she said. "But you will be unable to return!"

"You can imagine, of course, my eagerness to do so. My child, in a day or two there will be inquiries. They will ask what has become of me. Things will come to light. Then the hunt will start. But by then we shall be well upon our way, well ahead of any possible pursuit. You do not imagine that I could ever give the government any satisfactory explanation of my absence, assuming that any government remains to explain it to?"

"You mean that you will sacrifice your future, this career upon which you have embarked?" It took her breath away.

"With the way things are going, there is no career for me down there, at least no honest one. I hope you do not think that I could be dishonest. It is the day of the Dantons and the Marats, the day of the rabble. The reins of government will be tossed to the populace, or else the populace, drunk with the conceit that the Dantons and the Marats have filled it with, will seize the reins by force. Chaos must follow. It will be a despotism of brutes and apes, a government of the whole by its lowest parts. It cannot endure, because unless a nation is ruled by its best elements it must wither and decay."

"I thought you were a republican," she said.

"Why, so I am. I am talking like one. I desire a society that selects its rulers from the best elements of every class and denies the right of any class or corporation to usurp the government to itself, whether it is the nobles, the clergy, the bourgeoisie, or the proletariat. Government by any one class is fatal to the welfare of the whole. Two years ago, our ideal seemed to have been realized. The monopoly of power had been taken from the class that had held it too long and too unjustly by the hollow right of heredity. It had been distributed as evenly as possible throughout the State, and if men had only paused there, all would have been well. But our momentum carried us too far. The privileged orders goaded us on by their very opposition. The result is the horror of which you saw no more than the beginnings yesterday. No, no," he ended. "There may be careers for venal place-seekers and opportunists, but none for a man who desires to respect himself. It is time to go. I make no sacrifice in going."

"But where will you go? What will you do?"

"Oh, something. Consider that in four years I have been a lawyer, a politician, a swordsman, and a buffoon, especially the latter. There is always a place in the world for Scaramouche. Besides, do you know that, unlike Scaramouche, I have been oddly provident? I am the owner of a little farm in Saxony. I think that agriculture might suit me. It is a meditative occupation, and when all is said and done, I am not a man of action. I do not have the qualities for the part."

She looked up into his face, and there was a wistful smile in her deep blue eyes.

"Is there any part for which you do not have the qualities, I wonder?"

"Do you really think so? Yet you cannot say that I have made a success of any of those that I have played. I have always ended by running away. I am running away now from a thriving fencing academy, which is likely to become the property of Le Duc. That comes from having gone into politics, from which I am also running away. It is the one thing in which I really excel. That, too, is an attribute of Scaramouche."

"Why will you always be deriding yourself?" she wondered.

"I suppose it is because I recognize myself as part of this mad world. You would not have me take it seriously? I should lose my mind entirely if I did, especially after discovering my parents."

"Do not, Andre!" she begged him. "You are insincere, you know."

"Of course I am. Do you expect sincerity in man when hypocrisy is the very keynote of human nature? We are nurtured on it, we are schooled in it, we live by it, and we rarely realize it. You have seen it rampant and out of hand in France during the past four years, with cant and hypocrisy on the lips of the revolutionaries and on the lips of the upholders of the old regime. It is a riot of hypocrisy out of which chaos is born in the end. And I, who criticize it all on this beautiful God-given morning, am the rankest and most contemptible hypocrite of all. The realization of this truth kept me awake all night. For two years I have persecuted M. de La Tour d'Azyr by every means in my power."

He paused before uttering the name, as if hesitating how to speak of him.

"And in those two years I have deceived myself about the motive that was spurring me on. He spoke of me last night as the evil genius of his life, and he recognized the justice of this himself. It may be that he was right. Because of that, it is probable that even had he not killed Philippe de Vilmorin, things would still have been the same. Indeed, today I know that they must have been. That is why I call myself a hypocrite, a poor, self-duping hypocrite."

"But why, Andre?"

He stood still and looked at her. "Because he sought you, Aline. Because in that alone he must have found me ranged against him, utterly uncompromising. Because of that I must have strained every nerve to bring him down. As to save you from becoming the prey of your own ambition."

"I wish to speak of him no more than I must. After this, I trust I will never speak of him again. Before the lines of our lives crossed, I knew him for what he was. I knew the report of him that ran through the countryside. Even then I found him detestable. You heard him allude to the unfortunate La Binet last night. You heard him plead his mode of life and his upbringing in excuse of his fault. I suppose there is no answer to that. He conforms to type. Enough! But to me, he was the embodiment of evil, just as you have always been the embodiment of good. He was the embodiment of sin, just as you are the embodiment of purity. I had enthroned you so high, Aline, so high, and yet no higher than your place. Could I, then, suffer that you should be dragged down by ambition? Could I suffer the evil I detested to mate with the good I loved? What could have come of it but your own ruin, as I told you that day at Gavrillac? Because of that, my detestation of him became a personal, active thing. I resolved to save you at all costs from a fate so horrible. Had you been able to tell me that you loved him, it would have been different. I should have hoped that in a union sanctified by love you would have raised him to your own pure heights. But that out of considerations of worldly advancement you should lovelessly consent to mate with him... Oh, it was vile and hopeless. And so I fought him, like a rat fighting a lion. I fought him relentlessly until I saw that love had come to take the place of ambition in your heart. Then I desisted."

"Until you saw that love had taken the place of ambition!" Tears had been gathering in her eyes while he was speaking. Now amazement eliminated her emotion. "But when did you see that? When?"

"I was mistaken. I know it now. Yet, at the time... surely, Aline, that morning when you came to beg me not to keep my engagement with him in the Bois, you were moved by concern for him?"

"For him! It was concern for you," she cried, without thinking what she said.

But it did not convince him. "For me? When you knew, when all the world knew what I had been doing daily for a week!"

"Ah, but he was different from the others you had met. His reputation stood high. My uncle accounted him invincible. He persuaded me that if you met, nothing could save you."

He looked at her frowning.

"Why this, Aline?" he asked her with some sternness. "I can understand that, having changed since then, you should now wish to disown those sentiments. I suppose it is a woman's way."

"Oh, what are you saying, Andre? How wrong you are! I have told you the truth!"

"And was it concern for me," he asked her, "that laid you swooning when you saw him return wounded from the meeting? That was what opened my eyes."

"Wounded? I had not seen his wound. I saw him sitting alive and apparently unhurt in his carriage, and I concluded that he had killed you as he had said he would. What else could I conclude?"

He saw light, dazzling and blinding, and it scared him. He fell back, putting a hand to his brow. "And that was why you fainted?" he asked incredulously.

She looked at him without answering. As she began to realize how much she had been swept into saying by her eagerness to make him realize his error, a sudden fear came creeping into her eyes.

He held out both hands to her.

"Aline! Aline!" His voice broke on the name. "It was I..."

"Oh, blind Andre, it was always you, always! Never, never did I think of him, not even for a loveless marriage, except once for a little while, when that theater girl came into your life. Then..." She broke off, shrugged, and turned her head away. "I thought of following ambition, since there was nothing left to follow."

He shook himself. "I am dreaming, of course, or else I am mad," he said.

"Blind, Andre. Just blind," she assured him.

"Blind only where it would have been presumption to have seen."

"And yet," she answered him with a flash of the Aline he had known of old, "I have never found you lack presumption."

M. de Kercadiou emerged a moment later from the library window. He beheld them holding hands and staring at each other beatifically, as if each saw Paradise in the other's face.
