Chapter 1
The Golden City of Barefoot Men

The dust of Babylon was hot, heavy, and tasted distinctly of copper. It hung in the shimmering air like a golden haze, kicked up by the relentless passage of hooves, wheels, and sandaled feet.

Tarkad pressed his back against the cool, shaded mud-brick wall of a narrow alleyway, pulling his tattered woolen cloak tightly around his shoulders. He kept his head low, his dark eyes scanning the crowded thoroughfare just a few paces from his hiding spot. Every time a tall figure in a clean, bleached linen tunic walked past, Tarkad’s stomach did a painful, empty flip. He was hiding, and the shame of it burned hotter than the Babylonian sun.

Earlier that morning, he had spotted Dabasir, the bony camel trader, marching down the market street with his usual long, purposeful strides. Tarkad owed Dabasir only two copper pieces, but to a young man who had not eaten a proper meal in two days, those two coppers might as well have been mountains of solid gold. Dabasir had a loud, booming voice and a notoriously short temper, and Tarkad had no desire to be publicly shamed, grabbed by the collar, and denounced as a worthless debtor in the middle of the crowded bazaar.

He waited in the shadows until the crowd thickened, then slipped quietly out of the alley. The sun was climbing toward its peak, baking the great metropolis. Babylon was the undisputed wonder of the ancient world, a city of towering ziggurats that seemed to pierce the sky, lush hanging gardens that cascaded down stone terraces, and massive gates of solid brass. Yet, as Tarkad walked, he could not help but see two very different Babylons existing side by side.

Down the center of the broad, paved streets rode the wealthy and the powerful. They sat proudly in noisy, gold-trimmed chariots, their horses adorned with colored leather and bronze bells that jingled with every stride. Merchants in rich purple robes from Tyre argued over prices, their fingers glittering with heavy rings of gold and lapis lazuli. But on either side of the road, in the dusty gutters and narrow paths, walked the other Babylon.

These were the sandaled tradesmen, the weavers, the brickmakers, the potters, and the beggars. Most of them walked barefoot, their backs bent under the weight of their tools or products, their faces lined with deep lines of exhaustion. Among them marched long, miserable columns of enslaved water carriers, carrying heavy goatskins filled to the brim from the Euphrates River, marching up to the terraced gardens of the wealthy.

Tarkad looked down at his own dirty, bare feet. He was young, healthy, and capable of hard work. Yet his purse was as empty as his stomach. He had spent the last two years chasing quick schemes, borrowing a silver piece here and a copper piece there, always believing that tomorrow his luck would change and he would strike it rich. Now, tomorrow had arrived, and he had nothing to show for it but a list of angry creditors and a body that cried out for bread.

Desperate for a distraction and perhaps a bit of shade, Tarkad walked toward the outer district where the craftsmen worked. He soon heard the familiar metallic ring of hammers, the scraping of wood, and the low, melodious strumming of a stringed instrument.

He stepped into the open courtyard of Bansir, the chariot builder.

Bansir, the chariot builder of Babylon, was thoroughly discouraged. From his seat upon the low mud wall surrounding his property, he gazed sadly at his simple, dusty home and the open workshop in which stood a partially completed chariot. The wood was good, the frame was solid, but it sat there unfinished.

His wife frequently appeared at the open door of their home. Her furtive glances in his direction reminded him that the meal bag was almost empty, and that he should be at work finishing the chariot—hammering and hewing, polishing and painting, stretching taut the leather over the wheel rims, preparing it for delivery so he could collect the gold and silver from his wealthy customer.

Nevertheless, his fat, muscular body sat stolidly upon the wall. His slow mind was struggling patiently with a problem for which he could find no answer. The hot, tropical sun, so typical of this valley of the Euphrates, beat down upon him mercilessly. Beads of perspiration formed upon his brow and trickled down unnoticed to lose themselves in the hairy jungle on his chest.

Beyond his home towered the high terraced wall surrounding the king's palace. Nearby, cleaving the blue heavens, was the painted tower of the Temple of Bel. In the shadow of such grandeur was his simple home and many others far less neat and well cared for. Babylon was like this—a mixture of grandeur and squalor, of dazzling wealth and direst poverty, crowded together without plan or system within the protecting walls of the city.

Behind him, had he cared to turn and look, the noisy chariots of the rich jostled and crowded aside the sandaled tradesmen as well as the barefooted beggars. Even the rich were forced to turn into the gutters to clear the way for the long lines of slave water carriers, on the "King's Business," each bearing a heavy goatskin of water to be poured upon the hanging gardens.

Bansir was too engrossed in his own problem to hear or heed the confused hubbub of the busy city. It was the unexpected twanging of the strings from a familiar lyre that aroused him from his reverie. He turned and looked into the sensitive, smiling face of his best friend—Kobbi, the musician.

"May the Gods bless thee with great liberality, my good friend," began Kobbi with an elaborate salute and a wide grin. "Yet, it does appear they have already been so generous thou needest not to labor. I rejoice with thee in thy good fortune. More, I would even share it with thee. Pray, from thy purse which must be bulging else thou wouldst be busy in your shop, extract but two humble shekels and lend them to me until after the noblemen's feast this night. Thou wilt not miss them ere they are returned."

"If I did have two shekels," Bansir responded gloomily, "to no one could I lend them—not even to you, my best of friends; for they would be my fortune—my entire fortune. No one lends his entire fortune, not even to his best friend."

"What," exclaimed Kobbi with genuine surprise, "Thou hast not one shekel in thy purse, yet sit like a statue upon a wall! Why not complete that chariot? How else canst thou provide for thy noble appetite? 'Tis not like thee, my friend. Where is thy endless energy? Doth something distress thee? Have the Gods brought to thee troubles?"

"A torment from the Gods it must be," Bansir agreed, rubbing his face with his calloused hands.

Tarkad stepped into the shadow of the awning, watching the two men. "You look like a man who has just watched his house burn down, Bansir," Tarkad said, his voice raspy from thirst.

Bansir looked up, noticing Tarkad's pale face and tattered clothes, but he was too consumed by his own thoughts to comment on them. "In a way, Tarkad, it has. Or rather, the dream of my house has burned. I have been sitting here for hours, looking at this chariot. The wood is good, the brass fittings are strong, and the customer will pay me well when it is finished. Yet, I cannot bring myself to pick up my hammer.

"It began with a dream," Bansir continued, his eyes looking off into the distance. "A senseless dream, in which I thought I was a man of means. From my belt hung a handsome purse, heavy with coins. There were shekels which I cast with careless freedom to the beggars; there were pieces of silver with which I did buy finery for my wife and whatever I did desire for myself; there were pieces of gold which made me feel assured of the future and unafraid to spend the silver. A glorious feeling of contentment was within me! You would not have known me for thy hardworking friend. Nor wouldst have known my wife, so free from wrinkles was her face and shining with happiness. She was again the smiling maiden of our early married days."

"A pleasant dream, indeed," commented Kobbi, "but why should such pleasant feelings as it aroused turn thee into a glum statue upon the wall?"

"Why, indeed! Because when I awoke and remembered how empty was my purse, a feeling of rebellion swept over me. Let us talk it over together, for, as the sailors do say, we ride in the same boat, we three. As youngsters, we went together to the priests to learn wisdom. As young men, we shared each other's pleasures. As grown men, we have always been close friends. We have been contented subjects of our king. We have been satisfied to work long hours and spend our earnings freely. We have earned much coin in the years that have passed, yet to know the joys that come from wealth, we must dream about them. Bah! Are we more than dumb sheep?

"We live in the richest city in all the world," Bansir continued, his voice rising in frustration. "The travelers do say none equals it in wealth. About us is much display of wealth, but of it we ourselves have naught. After half a lifetime of hard labor, thou, my best of friends, hast an empty purse and sayest to me, 'May I borrow such a trifle as two shekels until after the noblemen's feast this night?' Then, what do I reply? Do I say, 'Here is my purse; its contents will I gladly share?' No, I admit that my purse is as empty as thine. What is the matter? Why cannot we acquire silver and gold—more than enough for food and robes?

"Consider, also, our sons," Bansir urged, pointing toward the street. "Are they not following in the footsteps of their fathers? Need they and their families and their sons and their sons' families live all their lives in the midst of such treasures of gold, and yet, like us, be content to banquet upon sour goat's milk and porridge?"

"Never, in all the years of our friendship, didst thou talk like this before, Bansir." Kobbi was deeply puzzled, his fingers resting still on the lyre.

"Never in all those years did I think like this before," Bansir admitted. "From early dawn until darkness stopped me, I have labored to build the finest chariots any man could make, soft-heartedly hoping some day the Gods would recognize my worthy deeds and bestow upon me great prosperity. This they have never done. At last, I realize this they will never do. Therefore, my heart is sad. I wish to be a man of means. I wish to own lands and cattle, to have fine robes and coins in my purse. I am willing to work for these things with all the strength in my back, with all the skill in my hands, with all the cunning in my mind, but I wish my labors to be fairly rewarded. What is the matter with us? Again I ask you! Why cannot we have our just share of the good things so plentiful for those who have the gold with which to buy them?"

"Would I knew an answer!" Kobbi replied. "No better than thou am I satisfied. My earnings from my lyre are quickly gone. Often must I plan and scheme that my family be not hungry. Also, within my breast is a deep longing for a lyre large enough that it may truly sing the strains of music that do surge through my mind. With such an instrument could I make music finer than even the king has heard before."

"Such a lyre thou shouldst have," Bansir said. "No man in all Babylon could make it sing more sweetly; could make it sing so sweetly, not only the king but the Gods themselves would be delighted. But how mayest thou secure it while we both of us are as poor as the king's slaves? Listen to the bell! Here they come."

He pointed to the long column of half-naked, sweating water bearers plodding laboriously up the narrow, dusty street from the river. Five abreast they marched, each bent under a heavy, wet goatskin of water.

"A fine figure of a man, he who doth lead them," Kobbi indicated the wearer of the bell who marched in front without a load, his stride proud despite his position. "A prominent man in his own country, 'tis easy to see."

"There are many good figures in the line," Bansir agreed, "as good men as we. Tall, blond men from the north, laughing black men from the south, little brown men from the nearer countries. All marching together from the river to the gardens, back and forth, day after day, year after year. Naught of happiness to look forward to. Beds of straw upon which to sleep—hard grain porridge to eat. Pity the poor brutes, Kobbi!"

"Pity them I do," Kobbi said softly. "Yet, thou dost make me see how little better off are we, free men though we call ourselves."

"That is truth, Kobbi, unpleasant thought though it be," Bansir muttered. "We do not wish to go on year after year living slavish lives. Working, working, working! Getting nowhere."

Tarkad sat down heavily on a block of unused cedar. The raw, gnawing hunger in his stomach made his voice sharp and bitter. "You talk of empty purses and lack of luxury, but at least you have homes, tools, and the respect of the community. I spent my morning ducking into doorways to avoid Dabasir. My stomach is a hollow pit. I have not eaten anything today but two small, dry figs which I managed to reach over a garden wall. I would work for anyone who would pay me a single copper today, but there is no work to be found that pays enough to buy both bread and freedom."

He looked at his friends, his eyes flashing. "We are exactly like the water bearers. We carry the weight of Babylon on our shoulders, but the water we bring only quenches the thirst of others. We build the chariots, we play the music, we write the records, but the gold always ends up in the hands of the masters."

Bansir stopped his pacing and looked at Tarkad. "Exactly! But why? Why do some men have gold flowing into their chests like the Euphrates, while we must bargain for every crust of barley bread? Is it because they are favored by the Gods? Or is there a secret to acquiring wealth that we simply do not know?"

"Might we not find out how others acquire gold and do as they do?" Kobbi inquired, plucking a single, clear note on his lyre. "Perhaps there is some secret we might learn if we but sought from those who knew."

"This very day," suggested Kobbi, "I did pass our old friend, Arkad, riding in his golden chariot. This I will say, he did not look over my humble head as many in his station might consider his right. Instead, he did wave his hand that all onlookers might see him pay greetings and bestow his smile of friendship upon Kobbi, the musician."

"He is claimed to be the richest man in all Babylon," Bansir mused, his brow furrowing.

"So rich the king is said to seek his golden aid in affairs of the treasury," Kobbi replied.

"So rich," Bansir interrupted, "I fear if I should meet him in the darkness of the night, I should lay my hands upon his fat wallet."

"Nonsense," reproved Kobbi, "a man's wealth is not in the purse he carries. A fat purse quickly empties if there be no golden stream to refill it. Arkad has an income that constantly keeps his purse full, no matter how liberally he spends."

"Income, that is the thing!" ejaculated Bansir. "I wish an income that will keep flowing into my purse whether I sit upon the wall or travel to far lands. Arkad must know how a man can make an income for himself. Dost suppose it is something he could make clear to a mind as slow as mine?"

"Methinks he did teach his knowledge to his son, Nomasir," Kobbi responded. "Did he not go to Nineveh and, so it is told at the inn, become, without aid from his father, one of the richest men in that city?"

"Kobbi, thou bringest to me a rare thought." A new light gleamed in Bansir's eyes. "It costs nothing to ask wise advice from a good friend, and Arkad was always that. Never mind though our purses be as empty as the falcon's nest of a year ago. Let that not detain us. We are weary of being without gold in the midst of plenty. We wish to become men of means. Come, let us go to Arkad and ask how we, also, may acquire incomes for ourselves."

"Thou speakest with true inspiration, Bansir," Kobbi said, his voice rising with excitement. "Thou bringeth to my mind a new understanding. Thou makest me to realize the reason why we have never found any measure of wealth. We never sought it. Thou hast labored patiently to build the staunchest chariots in Babylon. To that purpose was devoted your best endeavors. Therefore, at it thou didst succeed. I strove to become a skillful lyre player. And, at it I did succeed.

"In those things toward which we exerted our best endeavors we succeeded," Kobbi continued. "The Gods were content to let us continue thus. Now, at last, we see a light, bright like that from the rising sun. It biddeth us to learn more that we may prosper more. With a new understanding we shall find honorable ways to accomplish our desires."

"Let us go to Arkad this very day," Bansir urged, stepping down from the wall. "Also, let us ask other friends of our boyhood days, who have fared no better than ourselves, to join us that they, too, may share in his wisdom."

"Thou wert ever thus thoughtful of thy friends, Bansir. Therefore hast thou many friends," Kobbi said. "It shall be as thou sayest. We go this day and take them with us."

Tarkad stood up, adjusting his threadbare cloak. While the spark of determination had touched his friends, his immediate needs were far more pressing. He could not wait to learn how to build a grand estate over the coming years; his stomach was crying out now, and Dabasir was still out there in the streets.

"You go to Arkad," Tarkad said, his voice quiet but resolute. "He is indeed a great man, and his wisdom will serve you well. But my needs are immediate. I cannot listen to lectures on wealth when I have no bread for tonight. I am going to see Mathon."

Bansir frowned, looking at the young man. "Mathon? The gold lender? He is a cold man, Tarkad. He weighs every copper on his brass scales as if it were his own heart. He will not give you gold out of the goodness of his soul."

"I do not expect him to," Tarkad replied, his eyes narrowing. "Mathon sees the flow of all the gold in Babylon. He knows who is rising and who is falling. I am going to ask him for a loan—not to buy bread, but to start a trade. I have a strong back and a quick mind. If he refuses me, I will ask him how a man without gold can begin to earn it. If he is as wise as they say, he will recognize a willing worker."

Kobbi let out a dry, skeptical laugh. "A debtor asking a lender for financial wisdom? Mathon will throw you out of his shop, Tarkad. He deals in gold, not in the dreams of starving boys."

"Perhaps," Tarkad said, stepping out from the shade of the workshop into the blinding glare of the afternoon sun. "But staying here in the dust and complaining will not fill my purse or my stomach. I would rather be thrown out of a gold shop while trying to learn, than starve in an alleyway doing nothing."

With those words, Tarkad turned and walked away, his steps firm despite his hunger. Behind him, the sound of Kobbi's lyre began to play a new tune—no longer sad and drifting, but hopeful, rising above the dusty streets of Babylon as Bansir and Kobbi prepared to seek out the richest man in the city.

Tarkad made his way back toward the bustling center of the city, his mind set on the shop of Mathon the Gold Lender. He knew the risks. He knew that Mathon might turn him away, or worse, report him to his creditors. But as he pushed through the crowds of sandaled merchants and barefoot laborers, he felt a strange sense of clarity. The old ways of borrowing and hoping for luck were finished. If he was to survive in this golden city, he had to learn the rules of the game. And he would start with the man who held the scales.
