Epilogue
The Nottingham Letters

Letter 1

From Professor Alfred Shrewsbury
Department of Archaeology, Nottingham University
Newark-on-Trent, Nottingham, England

To Professor Franklin Caldwell
Care of British Scientific Expedition
Hillah, Mesopotamia (Iraq)

October 21, 1934

My dear Professor,

The five clay tablets from your recent excavation in the ruins of Babylon arrived on the same boat as your letter. I have been completely fascinated by them and have spent many pleasant hours translating their inscriptions. I should have answered your letter immediately, but I delayed until I could finish the attached translations.

The tablets arrived without any damage, thanks to your careful use of preservatives and excellent packing.

You will be just as astonished by the story they tell as we were in the laboratory. We usually expect the dim and distant past to speak of romance and adventure, of "Arabian Nights" style tales. But instead, these tablets reveal the struggles of a person named Tarkad trying to pay off his debts. It makes you realize that conditions in this old world have not changed nearly as much in five thousand years as you might expect.

It is strange, but these ancient inscriptions really shook me up. As a college professor, I am supposed to be a thinking human being with a working knowledge of most subjects. Yet, here comes this old fellow straight out of the dust-covered ruins of Babylon. He offers a way to pay off my debts and acquire jingling gold in my wallet that I had never even heard of.

It is a pleasant thought, and it will be very interesting to see if his method works just as well today as it did in old Babylon. Mrs. Shrewsbury and I are planning to try his plan on our own finances, which could certainly use the improvement.

I wish you the best of luck in your worthy expedition. I am eagerly waiting for another opportunity to assist you.

Yours sincerely,
Alfred H. Shrewsbury
Department of Archaeology

---

Letter 2

November 22, 1934

Dear Franklin,

I have completed the translation of the first three tablets, and I am astonished by what they reveal.

These tablets belonged to a young man named Tarkad. He describes himself as a former debtor who returned to Babylon determined to pay off his debts and live as a free man.

What is fascinating is that Tarkad’s financial problems in 3000 BC were exactly the same as the problems we face in England today. He was in debt to local merchants, camel traders, and gold lenders.

To solve his problems, Tarkad carved a plan onto these tablets. He divided his income into three strict portions:

First: **one-tenth of everything he earned was set aside as his own to keep.** As his advisor Mathon the gold lender told him: "A man who keeps gold and silver in his purse that he does not need to spend is good to his family and loyal to his king."

Second: **seven-tenths of all he earned was used to provide a home, clothes to wear, and food to eat.** He was warned to live strictly within this portion and never buy what he could not pay for out of this share.

Third: **two-tenths of all he earned was divided honorably and fairly among his creditors.** 

He records his visits to his creditors, including a food merchant named Kauskor and a camel trader named Dabasir. Some grumbled, but they all accepted the plan. In the third tablet, Tarkad proudly records that his savings are growing while his debts are steadily disappearing.

It is incredible to think that five thousand years ago, a young man was using the exact same budgeting principles that modern financial planners recommend today.

Sincerely,
Alfred

---

Letter 3

May 8, 1935

Dear Franklin,

Please forgive my long delay in writing. The reason for my silence is rather unusual.

Last winter, my wife Evelyn and I found ourselves in a serious financial crisis. Our household expenses had got out of hand. We owed money to the grocer, the tailor, and we were struggling with our monthly mortgage payments to the bank. I was constantly stressed, and we could see no way out.

One evening, as I was looking over the translation of Tarkad's tablets, Evelyn said to me, "Alfred, if this formula worked for a debtor in ancient Babylon, why shouldn't it work for us in Nottingham?"

We decided to try it. We treated Tarkad’s tablets not just as historical artifacts, but as active advice.

We made a list of all our debts, and I took it around and showed it to everyone we owed. I explained how it was simply impossible for me to ever pay them the way things were going. They could see this from the figures. Then I explained that the only way I saw to pay in full was to set aside twenty percent of my income each month to be divided proportionally. I added that, in the meantime, we would go on a cash basis and give them the further benefit of our cash purchases.

They were quite decent. Our greengrocer, a wise old man, put it in a way that helped to bring around the rest: "If you pay for all you buy and then pay some on what you owe, that is better than you have done, for you haven't paid down the account at all in three years."

Finally, I secured all their signatures to an agreement binding them not to bother us as long as the twenty percent was paid regularly. Then we began scheming on how to live upon seventy percent. The thought of silver and possibly gold was most alluring.

We enjoyed figuring this way and that to live comfortably upon that remaining seventy percent. We started with rent and managed to secure a fair reduction. Next, we put our favorite brands of tea under suspicion and were agreeably surprised how often we could purchase superior qualities at less cost.

It is too long a story for a letter, but anyhow it did not prove difficult. What a relief it proved to have our affairs in such shape that we were no longer persecuted by past due accounts.

And we did jingle that extra ten percent. After we had jingled to our hearts' content, we found a more profitable use for it. We took up an investment upon which we pay that ten percent each month. This is proving to be the most satisfying part of our regeneration. It is the first thing we pay out of my check.

All this out of my same old check! All our debts are being gradually paid, and at the same time our investment is increasing.

Sincerely,
Alfred

---

Letter 4

November 7, 1936

Dear Franklin,

If, in your further digging into those ruins of Babylon, you encounter the ghost of a former resident, an old traveler named Tarkad, do me a favor. Tell him that his scribbling upon those clay tablets, so long ago, has earned the lifelong gratitude of a couple of college folks back here in England.

Our debts are now completely paid off, and our investment is increasing steadily. Evelyn and I feel like free citizens for the first time in our lives.

We are determined never again to permit our living expenses to exceed seventy percent of our income. Now you can understand why we would like to extend our personal thanks to that old man whose plan saved us from our "Hell on Earth."

He knew. He had been through it all. That is why he spent tedious hours carving his message upon the clay. It is a message so important that after five thousand years it has risen out of the ruins of Babylon, just as true and just as vital as the day it was buried.

Yours sincerely,
Alfred H. Shrewsbury
Department of Archaeology
