Chapter 17

If any one of those dogs who yelp at philosophy asked me why I talk so much more bravely than I live, I would answer. They ask why I check my words in the presence of my superiors. They ask why I consider money a necessary tool. They ask why I feel disturbed when I sustain losses. They ask why I weep when I hear of the death of my wife or my friend. They ask why I pay regard to common rumors and feel annoyed by gossip. They ask why I keep my estate more elaborately than its natural use requires. They ask why I do not dine according to my own rules. They ask why my furniture looks smarter than it need be. They ask why I drink wine that is older than myself. They ask why I lay out my grounds and why I plant trees which afford nothing except shade. They ask why my wife wears the price of a rich man's house in her ears. They ask why my children wear costly clothes at school. They ask why a science exists to wait upon me at the table. They ask why I do not set down my silver plate randomly, but carefully arrange it in regular order with a superintendent to preside over the carving of the food. Add to this, if you like, the questions about why I own property beyond the seas and why I own more than I know of. They say I should feel shame because I do not know my slaves by sight. They say I must neglect them very much if I only own a few, or I must spend very extravagantly if I have too many for my memory to retain. I will add some reproaches afterward and will bring more accusations against myself than you think of. For the present, I will make you the following answer. I am not a wise man. I will not become one in order to feed your spite. So do not require me to stand on a level with the best of men. Merely require me to stand better than the worst. I feel satisfied if every day I take away something from my vices and correct my faults. I have not arrived at perfect soundness of mind, and indeed, I never shall arrive at it. I make treatments rather than remedies for my problems. I feel satisfied if they come at rarer intervals and do not shoot so painfully. Compared with your feet, which walk with a limp, I run as a racer. I make this speech not on my own behalf, for vices of every kind steep me. I make it on behalf of one who has made some progress in Virtue.
