Chapter 11

When I say that I do nothing for the sake of Pleasure, I mean that wise person whom alone you admit to be capable of Pleasure. I do not call a person wise when anything overcomes them. This remains especially true if Pleasure overcomes them. If Pleasure absorbs them, how will they resist toil, danger, want, and all the ills which threaten human life? How will they bear the sight of death or pain? How will they endure the noise of the world and fight against so many active foes? They cannot do this if so weak an opponent conquers them. They will do whatever Pleasure advises them. Do you not see how many things it will advise them to do? Our opponent says it will not give them any bad advice because it combines with Virtue. Do you not see what a poor kind of Highest Good that must be? It requires a guardian to ensure its goodness. How can Virtue rule Pleasure if she follows it? A subordinate has the duty to follow. A commander has the duty to rule. Do you put the commander in the background? According to your school, Virtue has the job of preliminary tester of pleasures. We shall see whether Virtue still remains Virtue among those who treat her with such disrespect. If she leaves her proper station, she can no longer keep her proper name. I will show you many people beset by pleasures. Fortune showered all her gifts upon them. You must admit they are bad people. Look at Nomentanus and Apicius. They eat all the good things of the sea and land. They review the entire animal kingdom upon their tables. Look at them as they lie on beds of roses gloating over their banquet. They delight their ears with music, their eyes with exhibitions, and their mouths with flavors. Soft and soothing things tickle their whole bodies. Their nostrils never remain idle. Various perfumes scent the very place where they feast. You will say that these men live in the midst of pleasures. Yet they remain ill at ease. They remain uncomfortable because they take pleasure in what is not good.
