Chapter 15

Our opponent asks what hinders Virtue and Pleasure from combining together. They ask how a person can form the Highest Good so that honor and Pleasure remain the same thing. The reason is that nothing except honorable things can form a part of honor. The Highest Good would lose its purity if it saw anything unlike its own better part within itself. Even the joy which arises from Virtue does not form a part of absolute good. It is indeed a good thing. This remains true just as much as cheerfulness or peace of mind. These are indeed good things but merely follow the Highest Good. They do not contribute to its perfection. This remains true although the noblest causes generate them. Whoever forms an alliance between Virtue and Pleasure forms a one-sided one. They clog whatever strength the one may possess with the weakness of the other. They send liberty under the yoke. Liberty can only remain unconquered as long as she knows nothing more valuable than herself. The person who combines them begins to need the help of Fortune. This creates the most utter slavery. Their life becomes anxious and full of suspicion. They become fearful of accidents. They wait in agony for critical moments of time. You do not afford Virtue a solid base if you bid it stand on unsteady things. What can be as unsteady as dependence on mere chance? What remains as unsteady as the changes of the body and the things which act on it? How can such a person obey God? How can they receive everything which comes to pass in a cheerful spirit? How can they never complain of fate and put a good construction upon everything that befalls them? They cannot do this if the petty pinpricks of pleasures and pains agitate them. A person cannot be a good protector of their country. They cannot be a good avenger of her wrongs or a good defender of their friends. They cannot do these things if they feel inclined to pleasures. Let the Highest Good rise to that height from which no force can dislodge it. Neither pain nor hope nor fear can ascend there. Nothing else that can impair the authority of the Highest Good can reach it. There Virtue alone can make her way. She must climb that hill by her aid. She will bravely stand her ground. She will endure whatever may befall her not only resignedly but even willingly. She will know that all hard times come because natural laws command them. Like a good soldier she will bear wounds and count scars. When she dies she will yet adore the general for whom she falls. She will bear in mind the old saying to follow God. On the other hand, a power forces the person who grumbles and complains to obey orders anyway. The power drags them away however much against their will to carry them out. Yet what madness is it to drag rather than to follow? It shows great folly and ignorance of one's true position. We grieve because we lack something or because something caused us rough treatment. We feel surprised or indignant at those ills which befall good people as well as bad ones. I mean diseases, deaths, illnesses, and the other cross accidents of human life. Let us bear with greatness whatever the system of the universe makes it needful for us to bear. This oath binds us all. We must bear the ills of mortal life. We must submit with a good grace to what we cannot avoid. Birth placed us into a kingdom. Our liberty is to obey God.
