Chapter 25

We both agree that they remain desirable. Learn my reason for counting them among good things. Learn in what respects I should behave differently from you if I possessed them. Place me as master in the house of a very rich person. Place me where people use gold and silver plate for the commonest purposes. I shall not think more of myself because of things which form no part of me, even though they remain in my house. Take me away to the wooden bridge and put me down there among the beggars. I shall not despise myself because I sit among those who hold out their hands for charity. What can the lack of a piece of bread matter to one who does not lack the power to die? Well, then! I prefer the magnificent house to the beggar's bridge. Place me among magnificent furniture and all the appliances of luxury. I shall not think myself any happier because my cloak feels soft. I shall not feel happier because my guests rest upon purple. Change the scene. I shall be no more miserable if my weary head rests upon a bundle of hay. I shall not feel more miserable if I lie upon a cushion from the circus with all the stuffing on the point of coming out through its patches of threadbare cloth. Well, then! I prefer, as far as my feelings go, to show myself in public dressed in woolen and in robes of office. I prefer this rather than with naked or half-covered shoulders. I should like every day's business to turn out just as I wish it to turn out. I should like new congratulations to follow constantly upon the former ones. Yet I will not pride myself upon this. Change all this good fortune for its opposite. Let losses, grief, and various kinds of attacks distract my spirit. Let no hour pass without some dispute. I shall not on this account call myself the most miserable of beings. This remains true even if the greatest miseries beset me. I shall not curse any particular day. I took care to have no unlucky days. What does all this mean? It means that I prefer to regulate joys rather than stifle sorrows. The great Socrates would say the same thing to you. He would ask you to make him the conqueror of all nations. He would ask you to let the car of Bacchus bear him in triumph to Thebes from the rising of the sun. He would ask you to let the kings of the Persians receive laws from him. Yet he shall feel himself to be a man at the very moment when all around salute him as a god. Straightway connect this lofty height with a headlong fall into misfortune. Let someone place me upon a foreign chariot so I may grace the triumph of a proud and savage conqueror. I will follow another's car with no more humility than I showed when I stood in my own. What then? In spite of all this, I had rather act as a conqueror than a captive. I despise the whole dominion of Fortune. Still, if someone gave me a choice, I would choose its better parts. I shall make whatever befalls me become a good thing. I prefer that what befalls me should feel comfortable and pleasant and unlikely to cause me annoyance. You need not suppose that any Virtue exists without labor. Some virtues need spurs, while others need the curb. We have to check our body on a downward path and urge it to climb a steep one. So also the path of some virtues leads downhill, and that of others leads uphill. Can we doubt that patience, courage, constancy, and all the other virtues have to meet strong opposition? They trample Fortune under their feet. They climb, struggle, and win their way up a steep ascent. Is it not equally evident that generosity, moderation, and gentleness glide easily downhill? With the latter we must hold in our spirit, lest it run away with us. With the former we must urge and spur it on. We ought to apply these energetic, combative virtues to poverty. We should apply to riches those other more thrifty ones which trip lightly along and merely support their own weight. Since this distinction exists between them, I would rather deal with those which I could practice in comparative quiet. I prefer those over the ones which one can only test through blood and sweat. Therefore, the sage says that they do not talk one way and live another. You do not rightly understand what I say. The sound of my words alone reaches your ears. You do not try to find out their meaning.
