Chapter 26

What difference exists between me, who act as a fool, and you, who act as a wise person? All the difference in the world! Riches remain slaves in the house of a wise person, but masters in the house of a fool. You accustom yourself to them and cling to them. You act as if somebody promised that they should remain yours forever. But a wise person never thinks so much about poverty as when riches surround them. No general ever trusts the maintenance of peace enough to neglect preparing for war. The enemy may not wage war, but they nevertheless declared it. A fine house renders you over-proud. You act as though fire could never burn it or cause it to fall down. Riches turn your heads. You act as though they rest beyond the reach of all dangers. You think they remain so great that Fortune lacks sufficient strength to swallow them. You sit idly playing with your wealth. You do not foresee the perils in store for it. Savages generally do this when besieged. They do not understand the use of siege artillery. They look on idly at the labors of the besiegers. They do not understand the object of the machines which people put together at a distance. This exactly happens to you. You go to sleep over your property. You never reflect how many misfortunes loom menacingly around you on all sides. They soon will plunder you of costly spoils. If one takes away riches from the wise person, one leaves them still in possession of all that belongs to them. They live happy in the present, and lack fear for the future. The great Socrates, or anyone else who had the same superiority to the things of this life, would say they have no more fixed principle than not altering the course of their life to suit your prejudices. You may pour your accustomed talk upon me from all sides. I shall not think that you abuse me. I shall think you merely wail like poor little babies. The person who possesses wisdom will say this. Their mind remains free from vices. It bids them reproach others not because they hate them, but in order to improve them. And to this they will add that your opinion of me affects me with pain not for my own sake but for yours. When you hate perfection and assail Virtue, you resign all hope of doing well. You do me no harm. Neither do people harm the gods when they overthrow their altars. It remains clear that your intention shows evil. You will wish to do harm even where you lack the ability. I bear with your prating in the same spirit in which Jupiter bears with the idle tales of the poets. One of them represents him with wings. Another represents him with horns. Another represents him as an adulterer staying out all night. Another represents him as dealing harshly with the gods. Another represents him as unjust to men. Another represents him as the seducer of noble youths whom he carries off by force, and those, too, his own relatives. Another represents him as a parricide and the conqueror of another's kingdom, and that kingdom his father's. The only result of such tales remains that people feel less shame at committing sin if they believe the gods commit such actions. Although this conduct of yours does not hurt me, yet for your own sakes I advise you to respect Virtue. Believe those who have long followed her. They cry aloud that they follow a thing of might which daily appears mightier. Reverence her as you would reverence the gods. Reverence her followers as you would reverence the priests of the gods. Whenever you mention sacred writings, favor us with silence. This word does not derive from favor, as most people imagine. It commands silence so that people may perform divine service without interruption by any words of evil omen. It remains much more necessary that someone should order you to do this. This ensures that whenever that oracle utters words, you listen to it with attention and in silence. Whenever anyone beats a sistrum, they pretend to do so by divine command. Any proficient in grazing their own skin covers their arms and shoulders with blood from light cuts. Anyone crawls on their knees howling along the street. Any old man clad in linen comes forth in daylight with a lamp and laurel branch and cries out that one of the gods feels angry. You crowd around him and listen to his words. Each increases the other's wonderment by declaring him divinely inspired.
