Chapter 20

You say that philosophers do not carry into effect all the things they teach. No, but they do much good by their teaching. They do good by the noble thoughts which they conceive in their minds. I wish they could truly act up to their talk. What could be happier than they would be? But in the meanwhile, you have no right to despise good sayings and hearts full of good thoughts. People deserve praise when they engage in profitable studies, even if they stop short of producing any results. We need not wonder if the people who begin to climb a steep path do not succeed in climbing it very high. Yet, look with respect on the people who attempt great things, even though they fall. A generous spirit proportions its efforts not to its own strength but to the strength of human nature. It acts generous to entertain lofty aims and to conceive plans which remain too vast to carry out even for people endowed with great intellects. These people appoint for themselves the following rules. I will look upon death or upon a comedy with the same expression of countenance. I will submit to labors, however great they may be. I will support the strength of my body by the strength of my mind. I will despise riches when I have them as much as when I lack them. If they exist elsewhere, I will not feel more gloomy. If they sparkle around me, I will not act more lively than I should otherwise act. Whether Fortune comes or goes, I will take no notice of her. I will view all lands as though they belong to me. I will view my own lands as though they belonged to all mankind. I will live to remember that birth made me for others. I will thank Nature on this account. In what fashion could she have done better for me? She gave me alone to all, and all to me alone. Whatever I possess, I will neither hoard it greedily nor spend it recklessly. I will think that I have no possessions as real as the possessions I gave away to deserving people. I will not count benefits by their magnitude or number. I will count them only by the value the receiver set upon them. I never will consider a gift large if someone bestows it upon a worthy object. I will do nothing because of public opinion, but everything because of conscience. Whenever I do anything alone by myself, I will believe that the eyes of the Roman people rest upon me while I do it. In eating and drinking, my object shall be to satisfy the desires of Nature, not to fill and empty my belly. I will act agreeable with my friends, and gentle and mild to my foes. I will grant pardon before someone asks me for it. I will meet the wishes of honorable people halfway. I will bear in mind that the world acts as my native city. Its governors are the gods, and they stand above and around me, and they criticize whatever I do or say. Whenever either Nature demands my breath again, or Reason bids me dismiss it, I will quit this life. I will call all to witness that I loved a good conscience and good pursuits. No one's freedom, my own least of all, suffered impairment through me. The person who sets up these as the rules of their life will soar aloft and strive to make their way to the gods. Of a truth, even if they fail, they fail in a high enterprise. But you, who hate both Virtue and the people who practice it, do nothing at which we need feel surprise. Sickly lights cannot bear the sun. Nighttime creatures avoid the brightness of day. At its first dawning they become bewildered and all go to their dens together. Creatures that fear the light hide themselves in crevices. So croak away, and exercise your miserable tongues when you reproach good people. Open wide your jaws and bite hard. You will break many teeth before you make any impression.
