Chapter 21

Someone asks how this man studies philosophy and nevertheless lives the life of a rich man. They ask why he says that people ought to despise wealth and yet possesses it. They ask why he says that people should despise life, and yet lives. They ask why people should despise health, yet he guards it with the utmost care and wishes it to remain as good as possible. They ask if he considers banishment to be an empty name. They say he asks what evil exists in changing one country for another, and yet if permitted, does he not grow old in his native land? They ask if he declares that no difference exists between a longer and a shorter time. They ask why, if nothing prevents him, he lengthens out his life and flourishes in a green old age? He answers that people ought to despise these things. This does not mean that he should not possess them. It means that he should not possess them with fear and trembling. He does not drive them away from himself. When they leave him he follows after them unconcernedly. Where can Fortune invest riches more securely? She can invest them in a place where she can always recover them without any fight with their trustee. Marcus Cato owned four million sesterces. He did this while he praised Curius and Coruncanius and that century in which the Censor punished the possession of a few small silver coins as an offense. This fortune remained smaller than the fortune of Crassus. However, it remained larger than the fortune of Cato the Censor. If one compares the amounts, he outstripped his great-grandfather further than Crassus outdid him. If still greater riches had fallen to his lot, he would not have spurned them. The wise person does not think themselves unworthy of any chance presents. They do not love riches, but they prefer to have them. They do not receive them into their spirit, but only into their house. They do not cast away from themselves the things they already possess. They keep them. They want their Virtue to receive a larger subject matter for its exercise.
