Chapter 24

He who believes giving to be an easy matter makes a mistake. It offers very great difficulties if we bestow our bounty rationally. We must not scatter it impulsively and at random. I do this person a service. I repay a good turn someone did for me. I help this other because I pity them. I teach this person that poverty should not hold them down or degrade them. I shall not give some people anything, although they need things. Even if I do give to them they will still need things. I shall proffer my bounty to some. I shall forcibly thrust it upon others. I cannot neglect my own interests while I do this. At no time do I put more people in my debt than when I give things away. You ask if I give so I may receive again. At any rate, I do not give so I may throw my bounty away. I should place what I give so that someone may give it back to me. I cannot ask for its return, though. I should invest a benefit in the same manner as a treasure buried deep in the earth. You would not dig it up unless you felt actually obliged to do so. What opportunities of conferring benefits the mere house of a rich person affords! Who considers generous behavior due only to those who wear the toga? Nature bids me to do good to mankind. What difference does it make whether they live as slaves or freemen? What difference does it make whether birth made them free or someone emancipated them? What difference does it make whether they legally acquired their freedom or an arrangement among friends bestowed it? Wherever a human being exists, an opportunity for a benefit exists. Consequently, someone may distribute money even within one's own threshold. A person may find a field there for the practice of generosity. We do not call it so because we owe a duty towards free people. It takes its rise in a free-born mind. In the case of the wise person, this never falls upon base and unworthy recipients. It never becomes so exhausted as not to flow as if its store remained undiminished. This happens whenever it finds a worthy object. You have no grounds for misunderstanding the honorable, brave, and spirited language. You hear this from those who study wisdom. First of all, observe this. A student of wisdom differs from a person who has made themselves perfect in wisdom. The former will say to you that they express the most admirable sentiments. Yet they still struggle amid countless ills. You must not force me to act up to my rules. At the present time I form myself. I mold my character. I strive to raise myself to the height of a great example. If I ever succeed in carrying out all that I set myself to accomplish, you may then demand that my words and deeds should correspond. But the person who has reached the summit of human perfection will deal otherwise with you. They will say that you have no business to allow yourself to sit in judgment upon your betters. I have already obtained one proof of my righteousness. I have become an object of dislike to bad people. However, I will make you a rational answer. I grudge this to no person. Listen to what I declare. Listen at what price I value all things. Riches do not represent a good thing. If they were, they would make people good. We cannot term good that which we find even among bad people. I do not allow people to call them so. Nevertheless, I admit that they remain desirable and useful. They contribute great comforts to our lives.
