Chapter 27

Behold! Socrates addresses you from his prison. By entering it, he cleansed it from shame and rendered it more honorable than any senate house. He asks about this madness of yours. He asks about this disposition. It wars alike with gods and men. It leads you to slander Virtue and to outrage holiness with malicious accusations. Praise good people if you can do so. If not, pass them by in silence. If indeed you take pleasure in this offensive abusiveness, attack one another. When you rave against Heaven, I do not say that you commit sacrilege. But you waste your time. I once afforded Aristophanes the subject of a joke. Since then, all the crew of comic poets have made me a mark for their envenomed wit. The very blows aimed at my Virtue made it shine more brightly. It benefits to come before the public and face temptation. No people understand its greatness more than those who test its strength by their assaults. None know the hardness of flint so well as those who strike it. I offer myself to all attacks. I resemble some lonely rock in a shallow sea. The waves never cease to beat upon it from whatever quarter they come. But they cannot move it from its place. They cannot wear it away, however many years they unceasingly dash against it. Bound upon me. Rush upon me. I will overcome you by enduring your onset. Whatever strikes against a firm and unconquerable object merely injures itself by its own violence. Wherefore, seek some soft and yielding object to pierce with your darts. But do you have leisure to peer into other men's evil deeds? Do you have leisure to sit in judgment upon anybody? You ask how this philosopher has so roomy a house. You ask how that one has so good a dinner. Do you look at other people's pimples while countless ulcers cover you? A person eaten up by the mange points with scorn at the moles and warts on the bodies of the handsomest men. You do the same thing. Reproach Plato because he sought money. Reproach Aristotle because he obtained it. Reproach Democritus because he disregarded it. Reproach Epicurus because he spent it. Cast Phaedrus and Alcibiades in my own teeth. You reach the height of enjoyment whenever you get an opportunity to imitate our vices! Why do you not rather cast your eyes around yourselves at the ills which tear you to pieces on every side? Some attack you from without. Some burn in your own bosoms. However little you know your own place, mankind has not yet come to such a pass. You lack the leisure to wag your tongues to the reproach of your betters.
