Chapter 6

Clerval handed me the letter. It was from Elizabeth:

"My dearest Cousin,

"You have been very sick. Henry has been writing to us, but that isn't enough to calm our worries. We know you aren't supposed to write, but we need just one word from you to know you are okay. My uncle wanted to travel to Ingolstadt to see you, but I convinced him not to. It's a long, hard journey. But I wish I could have gone to take care of you! I hate thinking that some hired nurse has been looking after you instead of me. But Henry says you are getting better. Please write to us as soon as you can.

"Get well and come home. We are all waiting for you. Your father is healthy and happy, and he just wants to see you. You will be surprised to see how much Ernest has grown! He is sixteen now and full of energy. He wants to join the military and travel, but we don't want him to leave until you come back. My uncle doesn't like the idea of him going into the army. But Ernest doesn't like studying. He spends all his time outside in the mountains and on the lake. We might have to let him join the military, or he will just be lazy.

"Everything else is the same here. The lake and the mountains never change, and our home is just as peaceful as always. I spend my time doing small chores and being with my family. But we do have one new person living with us. Do you remember Justine Moritz? Her mother was a widow with four kids. Justine was her father's favorite, but her mother hated her. After her father died, her mother treated her terribly. My aunt convinced her mother to let Justine come live with us when she was twelve. Because we live in Switzerland, servants are treated with respect, not like in France or England. Justine learned how to be a servant, but she was treated like family.

"You might remember that Justine was one of your favorites. She is always so happy and kind. My aunt loved her and gave her a good education. Justine was very grateful. She adored my aunt and tried to act just like her. 

"When my aunt died, everyone was too sad to notice poor Justine. She had taken care of my aunt while she was sick, and Justine got very sick herself afterwards. But she had more bad news coming. 

"One by one, Justine's siblings all died. Her mother was left alone. Her mother started to think that God was punishing her for treating Justine so badly. So, she asked Justine to come back home. Justine was sad to leave us. She wasn't a happy, bubbly girl anymore; she had become very quiet and gentle. 

"Living with her mother didn't make her happy. Her mother sometimes apologized, but mostly she blamed Justine for her siblings' deaths. This constant stress made her mother sick, and she died last winter. Now Justine is back with us, and I am so glad. She is very smart, gentle, and pretty. She reminds me so much of my dear aunt.

"I also have to tell you about little William. I wish you could see him! He is very tall for his age, with bright blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curly hair. He has two little dimples when he smiles. He already has a favorite 'girlfriend' named Louisa Biron, who is five years old.

"Now for some local gossip. Miss Mansfield is getting married to a young Englishman. Her sister Manon married a rich banker last fall. Your old school friend Louis Manoir had some bad luck after Henry left, but he is doing better now. He is going to marry a pretty French widow named Madame Tavernier.

"Writing this letter made me feel better. But please, Victor, write back. Just one line will make us so happy. Tell Henry thank you for all his letters. We are very grateful. Take care of yourself, and please write!

"Elizabeth Lavenza.
"Geneva, March 18"

"Dear, dear Elizabeth!" I said after reading the letter. "I will write back right now so they stop worrying." Writing the letter made me very tired, but I kept getting better. In two weeks, I was able to leave my room.

When I was better, I introduced Henry to my professors. But this was very hard for me. Ever since that terrible night when I brought the monster to life, I hated anything to do with science. Even looking at chemistry equipment made me feel sick and panicked. Henry noticed this and hid all my science tools. He even moved me to a new room so I wouldn't have to see my old lab. 

But Henry couldn't protect me when we visited the professors. Professor Waldman praised me for how much I had learned, which felt like torture. He realized I didn't want to talk about my own work, so he started talking about science in general. He thought he was being nice, but he was actually torturing me. Henry saw how upset I was and quickly changed the subject. I was so grateful to Henry, but I couldn't tell him why I was so upset. I loved him, but I couldn't share my horrible secret.

Professor Krempe was much less sensitive. His loud, booming praise hurt even more than Waldman's kindness. "He has beaten all of us!" Krempe shouted to Henry. "He's at the top of the class now!" Krempe then started bragging about himself, which was a relief because it changed the subject.

Henry had never liked science. He came to the university to study Middle Eastern languages. He wanted to learn Persian, Arabic, and Sanskrit so he could travel to the East. Because I hated science now, I decided to study these languages with him. It was a great distraction. I just read the stories for fun, and they were very calming and beautiful. They were completely different from the serious, heroic stories of Greece and Rome.

Summer passed, and I planned to return to Geneva in the fall. But some unexpected delays pushed my trip back to winter. By then, the roads were blocked by snow, so I had to wait until spring. I was very sad about this delay, because I really wanted to see my family. But the winter passed happily. When spring finally arrived, it was beautiful.

In May, I was waiting for a letter from home to tell me what day to travel. Henry suggested we go on a walking tour around Ingolstadt so I could say goodbye to the area. I agreed. We had always loved walking together.

We spent two weeks walking in the countryside. My health and happiness fully returned. The fresh air, nature, and Henry's good company healed me. Before, my studies had made me antisocial and depressed. But Henry helped me love nature and people again. He was such a good friend. The weather was perfect, and the spring flowers were blooming. For the first time in a year, I wasn't weighed down by dark thoughts.

Henry was thrilled to see me happy again. He entertained me with imaginative stories and poetry. We returned to the university on a Sunday afternoon. People were dancing in the streets, and everyone was happy. I felt incredibly joyful and carefree.
