Chapter 7

When I returned, I found a letter from my father:

"My dear Victor,

"You are probably waiting for a letter telling you when to come home. I wanted to just tell you the date, but I cannot. I need to prepare you for terrible news. 

"William is dead! Our sweet, gentle, happy child was murdered!

"I will simply tell you what happened. Last Thursday, we all went for a walk in Plainpalais. It was a warm evening, and we stayed out late. When it started getting dark, we realized William and Ernest were missing. Ernest soon came back and said he had been playing hide-and-seek with William, but William never came back. 

"We searched for him until night fell. We thought he might have gone home, but he wasn't there. We went back out with torches. Elizabeth was frantic. About five in the morning, I found my lovely boy lying dead on the grass. There were finger marks on his neck.

"We carried him home. When Elizabeth saw him, she examined his neck and cried, 'Oh God! I have murdered my darling child!' She fainted and was inconsolable when she woke up. She told me that she had let William wear a valuable miniature picture of your mother. The picture was gone. The murderer must have killed him to steal it. We have no clues, but the police are searching.

"Please come home, Victor. You are the only one who can comfort Elizabeth. She blames herself for his death. Come back with peace and love, not hatred or thoughts of revenge.

"Your loving and heartbroken father,
"Alphonse Frankenstein
"Geneva, May 12"

Henry watched my face as I read the letter. I threw the letter on the table and covered my face. "My dear Frankenstein," he said. "What has happened?"

I pointed to the letter. Henry read it and cried too. "I am so sorry," he said. "What are you going to do?"

"I must go to Geneva immediately," I said. "Please help me order the horses."

Henry tried to comfort me as we walked. He said William was an angel in heaven now, and that his suffering was over. Soon, the horses arrived, and I left for Geneva.

The journey was sad. At first, I hurried because I wanted to comfort my family. But as I got closer to home, I slowed down. I was terrified of what I would find. I stayed in Lausanne for two days to calm down. The beautiful lake and mountains helped a little, and I finally continued to Geneva.

When I got to Geneva, it was completely dark. The city gates were already locked, so I had to spend the night in a nearby village. I couldn't sleep, so I decided to visit the spot where William was murdered. 

I took a boat across the lake. A massive thunderstorm was brewing over the mountains. Lightning flashed and thunder boomed. The storm was terrifying but beautiful. 

"William, dear angel!" I shouted into the storm. "This is your funeral!"

Just then, a flash of lightning revealed a giant figure hiding behind a tree. I froze. Another flash showed his horrible face. It was the monster I had created! What was he doing here? Could he be William's murderer? As soon as I thought it, I knew it was true. My teeth chattered, and I leaned against a tree so I wouldn't fall over. 

The monster ran past me quickly and climbed up a steep, rocky cliff with incredible speed. He reached the top and disappeared. 

I stood there in the dark and rain. It had been nearly two years since I brought him to life. Was this his first crime? Had I unleashed a bloodthirsty demon into the world? I spent the rest of the night outside in the cold rain, tortured by my thoughts.

When the sun came up, the city gates opened, and I rushed to my father's house. At first, I wanted to tell everyone about the monster and start a hunt for him. But then I realized how crazy the story sounded. Who would believe that I had built a giant monster? Even if they did, who could catch a creature that could climb steep cliffs so easily? I decided to keep my secret.

I arrived at my house around five in the morning. My brother Ernest greeted me with tears in his eyes. 

"Welcome, Victor," he said. "I wish you had come earlier. Elizabeth is miserable because she blames herself for William's death. But we just discovered who the murderer is."

"The murderer is discovered?" I asked, shocked. "How? He was free last night!"

"What do you mean?" Ernest asked, confused. "We just found out, and it makes everything worse. Justine Moritz has been accused of the murder."

"Justine!" I cried. "That's impossible! Everyone knows she is innocent!"

"We thought so too," Ernest said. "But she was sick for a few days after the murder. While she was in bed, a servant found the stolen picture of our mother in Justine's pocket. The servant went to the police, and Justine was arrested. When they questioned her, she acted very confused, which made her look guilty."

"You are all wrong," I said firmly. "I know who the murderer is. Justine is innocent."

My father walked into the room. He looked exhausted and heartbroken. "I wish I had never learned how ungrateful and evil Justine could be," he said.

"Father, she is innocent!" I insisted. 

"I hope so," he said. "Her trial is today."

I was absolutely sure Justine was innocent. I knew my monster had killed William. 

Elizabeth soon joined us. She was more beautiful than ever, but she looked so sad. "Victor, thank goodness you are here," she said. "Please help us prove Justine is innocent. If she is convicted, I will never be happy again."

"She is innocent, Elizabeth," I said. "And we will prove it."

"Thank you!" she cried. "Everyone else thinks she is guilty, and it is breaking my heart."
