Chapter 8

At eleven o'clock, Justine's trial began. My family had to attend as witnesses, and I went with them. The trial felt like torture to me. Because of my terrible experiment, an innocent child was dead, and now a sweet, kind girl was about to be executed for it. I would have gladly confessed to the crime myself, but no one would have believed me. They would just think I was crazy.

Justine looked calm and beautiful in her mourning clothes. She didn't tremble, even though the whole courtroom was staring at her with hatred. She tried to look brave. When she saw our family, she almost cried, but she quickly recovered and gave us a look that showed she was truly innocent.

The trial started. The prosecutor presented strange facts that made her look guilty. She had been out all night on the night of the murder. Early the next morning, a woman saw her near the spot where William's body was later found. When the woman asked what she was doing, Justine gave a confused answer. Justine returned home at eight o'clock. When asked where she had been, she said she was looking for William. When they showed her William's body, she became hysterical and had to stay in bed for days. Finally, they showed the picture that was found in her pocket. Elizabeth cried as she confirmed it was the same picture she had given William right before he disappeared. The courtroom gasped in horror.

Justine was asked to defend herself. She looked horrified and miserable. She gathered her courage and spoke clearly.

"God knows I am innocent," she said. "I can only explain what happened and hope you will believe me. Elizabeth gave me permission to visit my aunt in a nearby village that evening. I was walking back home around nine o'clock when a man told me William was missing. I was so worried that I spent hours searching for him. By the time I tried to go home, the city gates were locked. I had to sleep in a barn. I didn't even know I was near the spot where the poor child died. I was confused when the woman spoke to me because I had been awake all night worrying about William. As for the picture, I have no idea how it got in my pocket. I don't know who would want to frame me for this."

Several people who knew Justine well were called to testify. But the crime was so horrible that they were too scared to say anything good about her. Seeing this, Elizabeth stood up and asked to speak. 

"I am William's cousin," Elizabeth said. "I grew up with him. I have also lived with Justine for years. She is the kindest person I know. She took care of my aunt and her own mother when they were dying. She loved William like he was her own child. Despite the evidence, I believe she is completely innocent. She had no reason to steal that picture. If she had asked for it, I would have just given it to her!"

People murmured, moved by Elizabeth's speech. But they just thought Elizabeth was being generous, and they hated Justine even more for betraying such a kind family. 

I couldn't stand the agony anymore. I knew the monster had killed William and framed Justine. Seeing the judges ready to condemn her, I rushed out of the courtroom. I felt more tortured than Justine did. She was innocent, but I was eaten alive by guilt.

I spent a miserable night. The next morning, I found out the verdict. Justine was found guilty and sentenced to death.

My despair was indescribable. An officer told me that Justine had even confessed to the crime. I was shocked. Was I crazy? Had I imagined the monster in the storm? I went home and told Elizabeth the news.

"She confessed?" Elizabeth cried. "How could she do this? She looked so innocent, but she was a murderer all along!"

Soon after, we heard that Justine wanted to see Elizabeth. My father told Elizabeth she didn't have to go, but she insisted. "I will go," she said. "But Victor, you must come with me." I hated the idea, but I couldn't say no.

We went to the dark prison. Justine was sitting on straw, her hands in chains. She threw herself at Elizabeth's feet, crying. 

"Oh, Justine!" Elizabeth cried. "Why did you do it? I believed you were innocent!"

"Do you really think I am a murderer?" Justine sobbed. 

"Then why did you confess?" Elizabeth asked. "I won't believe you are guilty unless you tell me yourself."

"I lied!" Justine said. "I only confessed because the priest threatened me with hell if I didn't. He terrified me, and everyone already hated me. So I lied to get absolution. But now the lie hurts more than anything. I am innocent! I am going to die, but I know I will see sweet William in heaven."

"Oh, Justine, forgive me for doubting you!" Elizabeth said. "I will prove you are innocent! You can't die!"

Justine shook her head. "I am not afraid to die anymore. God has given me strength. Just promise you will remember me as an innocent person."

I stood in the corner of the cell, hiding my face. I was the true murderer. I groaned in agony. 

"You are very kind to visit me, sir," Justine said to me. "I hope you don't think I am guilty."

I couldn't speak. "He knows you are innocent," Elizabeth said. "He never believed your confession."

Justine smiled sadly. "Thank you. Knowing that you both believe me makes dying so much easier."

Justine was ready to accept her fate, but I felt a fire of guilt burning inside me. We stayed with her for hours until Elizabeth finally forced herself to leave. 

The next day, Justine was executed. Elizabeth's pleas and my own desperate arguments couldn't change the judges' minds. I couldn't tell them the truth without sounding crazy. So, Justine died on the scaffold, labeled a murderer.

I watched Elizabeth's silent grief. I saw my father's heartbreak. My family was destroyed, and it was all my fault! Because of my cursed experiment, two innocent people were dead, and my loved ones were suffering. 
