Chapter 5

It was a dark, rainy night in November when I finally finished my work. My heart was pounding with anxiety. I gathered my instruments to give the spark of life to the dead thing lying at my feet. It was 1:00 AM. The rain hit the windows, and my candle was almost burned out. By the dim light, I saw the creature's dull yellow eyes open. It breathed heavily, and its arms and legs twitched.

How can I describe how I felt? How can I describe this monster I had worked so hard to make? I had tried to make him beautiful. Beautiful! Good God! His yellow skin barely covered his muscles and veins. His hair was black and shiny, and his teeth were white. But these features only made him look worse. His eyes were watery and looked almost the same color as his pale eye sockets. His skin was wrinkled, and his lips were straight and black.

I had worked for nearly two years just to bring this dead body to life. I had given up sleep and health for it. But now that it was done, my dream turned into a nightmare. I was filled with horror and disgust. I couldn't stand to look at him. I ran out of the room and paced back and forth in my bedroom, unable to sleep. 

Finally, I was so tired that I fell onto my bed in my clothes. I tried to sleep, but I had terrible nightmares. I dreamed I saw Elizabeth walking in the street. She looked healthy and happy. I hugged and kissed her. But as I kissed her, her lips turned pale like a dead person's. Her face changed, and suddenly I was holding the dead body of my mother. She was wrapped in a burial shroud, and grave-worms were crawling on her. 

I woke up screaming. I was sweating, shaking, and my teeth were chattering. By the pale yellow moonlight shining through the window, I saw the monster I had created. He was holding up the bed curtain and staring at me. He opened his mouth and made some strange sounds, and he smiled. He might have tried to speak, but I didn't hear him. He reached out his hand to grab me, but I ran away. I ran downstairs and hid in the courtyard all night. I paced back and forth, terrified that the monster would find me.

No one could stand to look at that horrible face. Not even a mummy would look as ugly as that monster. He was ugly before he came to life, but once he started moving, he was a nightmare. 

I spent a miserable night. My heart was racing, and I felt weak and sick. I was also deeply disappointed. My beautiful dream had turned into a hell. It all went wrong so fast!

When morning finally came, it was dark and rainy. The town gates opened, and I ran out into the streets. I walked fast, constantly looking over my shoulder to see if the monster was following me. I didn't dare go back to my room. I just kept walking in the rain.

I walked for a long time, trying to clear my head. I didn't know where I was going. My heart was pounding with fear. 

Finally, I stopped across from the inn where the stagecoaches arrived. I watched a coach pull up. The door opened, and my good friend Henry Clerval stepped out. 

"My dear Frankenstein!" he shouted. "I am so happy to see you! What good timing!"

I was thrilled to see him. Seeing Clerval made me think of my father, Elizabeth, and my home. I grabbed his hand and completely forgot about the monster. For the first time in months, I felt truly happy. We started walking back to my college. 

Clerval talked about our friends back home. "It was very hard to convince my father to let me come here," he said. "He thinks the only thing worth learning is bookkeeping. But he finally let me come."

"I am so glad you're here," I said. "How are my father, my brothers, and Elizabeth?"

"They are doing great, but they are worried about you. You hardly ever write to them. But Victor," Clerval stopped and looked at me closely, "you look terrible! You are so thin and pale. Have you been staying up all night?"

"You're right," I said. "I've been working too hard on a project. But I hope it is finally over and I can rest."

I started shaking. Just thinking about the monster made me panic. We walked faster. Then I realized that the monster might still be in my room. I didn't want to see him, but I especially didn't want Henry to see him. 

I asked Henry to wait at the bottom of the stairs. I ran up to my room. I hesitated before opening the door. I was terrified of what might be inside. I pushed the door open, but the room was empty. The monster was gone! I was so relieved that I clapped my hands and ran back downstairs to get Henry.

We went up to my room, and a servant brought us breakfast. I couldn't stay still. I felt wildly happy and energetic. I jumped over chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed loudly. At first, Henry thought I was just happy to see him. But then he saw how crazy my eyes looked, and my loud laughter scared him.

"Victor, what is wrong with you?" he cried. "Don't laugh like that. You look sick! What happened?"

"Don't ask me!" I screamed, covering my eyes. I thought I saw the monster coming into the room. "He can tell you! Save me! Save me!" I imagined the monster grabbing me, and I fainted.

Poor Henry! He must have been so confused and upset. His happy reunion with me turned into a nightmare. But I didn't know what was happening, because I stayed unconscious for a long, long time.

That was the beginning of a terrible nervous fever that kept me in bed for months. Henry was my only nurse. He didn't tell my family how sick I was because he didn't want them to worry or travel all the way to see me. He took great care of me himself.

I was very sick. I would have died if Henry hadn't been there. I kept seeing the monster's face everywhere, and I yelled about him constantly. Henry thought I was just hallucinating at first, but I talked about the monster so much that he realized something terrible had really happened to me.

Very slowly, I started to get better. I remember looking out my window and seeing the spring leaves growing on the trees. The beautiful weather helped me heal. I felt happy and peaceful again.

"Dearest Clerval," I said one day, "you have been so good to me. You spent your whole winter taking care of me instead of studying. How can I ever repay you? I am so sorry for ruining your plans."

"You can repay me by getting better," Henry said. "Since you are feeling better today, can I talk to you about something?"

I started shaking. What was he going to ask? Was he going to ask about the monster?

"Calm down," Henry said quickly. "I won't bring it up if it upsets you. But your father and cousin would really love to get a letter from you. They are very worried."

"Is that all?" I asked, relieved. "Of course I want to write to my family. I love them."

"Well then, you will be happy to see this letter," Henry said. "It's from your cousin."
