Chapter 4

From that day on, science—especially chemistry—became my only interest. I obsessively read books by modern scientists. I attended lectures and got to know the science professors at the university. Even Professor Krempe, despite his ugly appearance and bad manners, had a lot of useful knowledge. 

In Professor Waldman, I found a true friend. He was never arrogant. He taught with a friendly and open attitude that made learning easy. He helped me understand the hardest topics. At first, my studying was inconsistent. But soon, I became so obsessed that I would stay in my lab until morning.

Because I worked so hard, I learned very fast. The other students were amazed, and the professors treated me like an equal. Two years passed like this. I didn't even visit my home in Geneva. I was completely focused on making new discoveries. Science is addictive because there is always more to learn. After two years, I improved some chemical instruments, which earned me a lot of respect at the university. At that point, I had learned everything my professors could teach me. I thought about going home, but then something happened that kept me there.

I was fascinated by the human body and how life works. I asked myself: where does life come from? It was a bold question. It had always been a mystery. But I decided to study the science of life. To understand life, I first had to study death. I studied anatomy, but I also had to watch bodies rot and decay. 

My father had always protected me from scary stories, so I wasn't afraid of ghosts or the dark. To me, a graveyard was just a place for dead bodies that were turning into food for worms. I spent days and nights in graveyards and tombs, studying how bodies decay. I watched beautiful human bodies rot away. 

I studied every little detail of how life turns into death, and how death turns into life. Then, suddenly, I had a brilliant idea. It was so simple and clear that I was amazed no one else had thought of it before.

I am not crazy. What I am telling you is as real as the sun in the sky. After days and nights of exhausting work, I discovered the secret of life. Even more, I figured out how to bring dead matter back to life!

At first, I was surprised. Then, I was thrilled. After so much hard work, I had finally achieved my goal. What the smartest people in the world had tried to do since the beginning of time, I had done. 

I can see how eager you are to know my secret. But I cannot tell you. Listen to the rest of my story, and you will understand why I must keep it a secret. I will not lead you to your own destruction. Learn from my mistakes. Knowledge can be very dangerous. It is much better to live a simple life than to try to be greater than nature allows.

When I realized what I could do, I didn't know how to use this power. I could bring things to life, but building a body with all its complicated parts was still incredibly hard. I wasn't sure if I should try to make a human or a simpler animal. But I was so proud of my success that I decided to make a human. 

I knew it would be difficult and that I might fail many times. But I started anyway. Because the small parts of the human body were too hard to build, I decided to make my creature a giant. It would be about eight feet tall. I spent months gathering and organizing the materials I needed.

I was driven by a wild excitement. I thought I was going to break the boundaries of life and death. I imagined a whole new species of beings that would worship me as their creator. I thought I might even be able to bring dead people back to life one day.

These thoughts kept me going. I grew pale and thin from staying inside and working so hard. Sometimes I failed, but I always kept trying. The moon watched me work late into the night. I don't want to remember the horrible things I did. I dug up bones from graveyards and tortured live animals to learn their secrets. I was acting like a crazy person. I set up my workshop in a small, lonely room at the top of the house. I used body parts from the dissecting room and the slaughterhouse. Often, I felt sick from what I was doing, but I couldn't stop. I was too close to finishing.

Summer passed. It was a beautiful season, but I didn't notice nature at all. I also forgot about my friends and family back home. I knew my father would be worried because I wasn't writing to him. 

I knew I was doing something wrong by ignoring my family, but I couldn't stop myself. I wanted to finish my project before I thought about anything else. A healthy person should keep a calm mind and not let any obsession take over their life. If a project makes you forget the people you love, then it is a bad project. 

But I am getting off track. I will continue my story.

My father didn't scold me in his letters. He just asked what I was working on. Winter, spring, and summer passed while I worked. I didn't even notice the changing seasons. By the time autumn came, my work was almost done. 

But my excitement turned into anxiety. I felt like a slave to my work. I had a low fever every night and became extremely nervous. The smallest sound made me jump. I avoided people as if I were a criminal. I promised myself I would rest and get better as soon as my creation was finished.
