Chapter 9

Nothing is worse than the dead, empty feeling that comes after a series of terrible events. Justine was dead. She was finally at peace. But I was still alive, crushed by guilt and despair. I couldn't sleep. I wandered around like a ghost. I had started my life wanting to help the world, but now I had caused horrible destruction. 

My guilt made me physically sick. I avoided people because the sound of happiness felt like torture. I only wanted to be completely alone in the dark.

My father saw how depressed I was. He tried to comfort me. "Victor," he said with tears in his eyes, "I am suffering too. I loved William more than anything. But we have to hide our grief so we don't make everyone else sadder. You have a duty to yourself and to us to keep going."

His advice was good, but it didn't help me. He didn't know that I was also hiding a terrifying secret. I could only look at him with despair and try to hide.

Around this time, we moved to our house in Belrive, just outside the city. This was much better for me. In Geneva, the city gates closed at ten o'clock, which meant I couldn't go out on the lake at night. But at Belrive, I was free. Often, after everyone went to sleep, I would take a boat out onto the lake and stay there for hours. Sometimes I sailed, and sometimes I just let the boat drift. When the lake was silent and beautiful, I often thought about jumping in and drowning myself. The only thing that stopped me was thinking of Elizabeth, my father, and my brother. If I died, I would leave them completely unprotected from the monster I had created.

I cried constantly. I knew the monster might commit even worse crimes. I lived in terror every day. I hated the monster with a passion I can't even describe. I wanted to kill him to avenge William and Justine. I would have climbed the highest mountain in the world just to throw him off of it. 

Our house was full of sadness. My father's health was failing. Elizabeth was deeply depressed. She stopped doing the things she loved, feeling that being happy was an insult to the dead. She was no longer the joyful girl who used to talk excitedly about the future.

"My dearest cousin," she told me one day. "The world looks completely different to me now. I used to think evil only happened in old stories. But now, it feels like men are bloodthirsty monsters. I know I am being unfair. Everyone thought Justine was guilty, and if she had actually killed William for a piece of jewelry, she would be a monster. But she was innocent! I know she was. And because of that, I feel like I can't trust anything anymore. A murderer is walking free, and Justine is dead."

I listened to her in agony, knowing that I was the real cause of all this misery. Elizabeth saw my pain and took my hand. "Victor, please calm down. You look so desperate and angry. Please focus on the friends who love you. We are safe here. What can ruin our peace now?"

Her words couldn't comfort me. I was terrified that the monster would show up and kill her right in front of me. Even the beauty of nature couldn't make me feel better. I was like a wounded deer, dragging myself away to die.

Sometimes, the despair was so heavy that I had to leave home to find relief. I decided to travel to the Alpine valleys of Chamounix. I had visited the area when I was a boy. The beautiful, wild scenery was exactly what I needed. 

I rode a horse for the first part of the trip, then hired a mule for the steep mountain roads. It was mid-August. As I traveled deeper into the mountains, the heavy weight on my heart began to lift. The massive cliffs, the roaring rivers, and the waterfalls reminded me of how small my problems were compared to the power of nature. The scenery was stunning. Ruined castles hung on pine-covered cliffs. The bright white peaks of the Alps towered over everything like a different world.

I crossed a bridge and entered the valley of Chamounix. It was incredible. Giant glaciers came right down to the road. I heard the thunder of avalanches and saw their snowy smoke. The magnificent Mont Blanc towered above the valley. 

During the journey, I actually felt flashes of joy. Seeing familiar places from my childhood made me happy for a moment. But the grief always came back, dragging me back down into despair. 

Finally, I arrived at the village of Chamounix. I was completely exhausted. I watched the lightning play over Mont Blanc and listened to the rushing river. The sounds lulled me to sleep, and for a short time, I finally forgot my misery.
