Chapter 15

"The history of my friends deeply impressed me. I learned to admire their virtues and hate human cruelty. 

"One night in August, while gathering wood, I found a leather suitcase on the ground. Inside were some clothes and three books: 'Paradise Lost,' 'Plutarch's Lives,' and 'The Sorrows of Werter.' I eagerly took them back to my hut and studied them constantly.

"These books filled me with new thoughts and emotions. 'The Sorrows of Werter' taught me about deep feelings, depression, and death. I felt like the main character, yet totally different. I had no family, no friends, and no one to mourn me. My body was huge and hideous. I kept asking myself: Who was I? Where did I come from? What was my purpose? 

"'Plutarch's Lives' taught me about ancient history, empires, and great leaders. It showed me the difference between virtue and evil. I grew to admire peaceful lawmakers and hate violent conquerors. 

"But 'Paradise Lost' affected me most of all. I read it as if it were true history. It told the story of an all-powerful God creating the world. I compared myself to Adam. But Adam was a perfect creature, protected and loved by his Creator. I was wretched, helpless, and completely alone. Instead, I felt more like Satan. When I watched my protectors' happiness, bitter envy filled my heart.

"Another discovery made things even worse. Shortly after arriving at the hut, I had found some papers in the pocket of the clothes I took from your laboratory. Once I learned to read, I studied them. It was your journal. You wrote down every detail of my creation. You described my hideous body with disgust. I sickened as I read it. 'Accursed creator!' I cried. 'Why did you make a monster so ugly that even you turned away in disgust? God made man beautiful, but my form is a filthy, terrifying copy of yours. Even Satan had fellow devils, but I am entirely alone!'

"Despite my despair, I still hoped the villagers would accept me. I decided to introduce myself to them, but I waited several months to improve my speech.

"Winter arrived. My plan was to enter the cottage when the blind old man was alone. I knew my ugly face terrified people, but my voice was gentle. If I could win the old man's friendship, maybe he could convince his children to accept me.

"One day, Felix, Agatha, and Safie went for a long walk, leaving the old man behind. He played his guitar, looking thoughtful and sad. My heart raced. This was my chance. I gathered my courage and knocked on the door.

"'Who is there?' the old man asked. 'Come in.'

"'Pardon my intrusion,' I said. 'I am a tired traveler. Could I rest by your fire for a few minutes?'

"'Enter,' De Lacey said kindly. 'My children are gone, and I am blind, so I cannot offer you much food, but you are welcome.'

"I sat down. I told him I was a traveler trying to claim the protection of some friends, but I was terrified they would reject me because of a fatal prejudice. 

"'Do not despair,' the old man said. 'If they are good people, they will accept you. I am blind, but your words sound sincere. I would be happy to help you.'

"'Thank you, my best and only friend!' I cried. 'From your lips, I hear the first kind words ever spoken to me.'

"'Who are these friends?' he asked.

"I hesitated. The moment of truth had arrived. I heard the footsteps of his children returning. I fell to his knees and sobbed, 'Now is the time! Save and protect me! You and your family are the friends I seek!'

"'Great God!' the old man exclaimed. 'Who are you?'

"At that instant, the door opened. Felix, Safie, and Agatha walked in. When they saw me, Agatha fainted, and Safie ran out of the cottage screaming. Felix rushed forward furiously. He tore me away from his father and beat me violently with a heavy stick. I could have torn him apart like a lion, but my heart was broken. I did not fight back. Instead, I fled back to my hut, unseen."
