Chapter 16

"Cursed, cursed creator! Why didn't I just die? My heart filled with rage and revenge. I wanted to destroy the cottage and listen to their shrieks of misery. 

"That night, I ran into the woods, howling like a wild beast. I wanted to tear down the trees and destroy everything around me. I declared everlasting war against all of humanity, and most of all against you—the man who created me and abandoned me to this misery.

"By morning, I calmed down. I realized I had acted foolishly by shocking the children. I decided to return to the cottage, speak to the old man again, and slowly win over his family. I hid in the woods and waited for nightfall.

"When I returned to the cottage, it was completely silent. The family was gone. The next morning, Felix arrived with a stranger. I listened as Felix ended his lease. He told the man his father's life was in danger and that his sister and wife would never recover from their horror. They packed their things and left. I never saw them again.

"My heart broke. They were my only connection to the world. A deep, violent hatred replaced my sadness. I waited until the moon set, piled dry branches around the cottage, and set it on fire. The wind fed the flames, and the cottage burned to the ground. Then, I ran into the woods.

"I had nowhere to go. Finally, I thought of you. I had learned from your journal that you lived in Geneva. You gave me life, so you owed me help. I set off on a long, miserable journey. I traveled only at night to avoid people. Winter came, and the freezing cold and snow made me bitter and angry.

"When spring finally arrived, I felt a brief moment of joy. One day, I was hiding in the woods near a deep, fast river. A little girl ran past me, slipped, and fell into the rushing water. I leaped in and fought the strong current to save her. I dragged her to the shore and tried to wake her up. 

"Suddenly, a man rushed out of the woods. He tore the girl from my arms and ran away. I followed him, not knowing why. He turned, pointed his gun at me, and fired. The bullet shattered my shoulder. I fell to the ground in agony. 

"This was my reward for saving a human life! My kindness vanished forever, replaced by hellish rage. For weeks, I hid in the woods, enduring terrible pain as my wound slowly healed. I swore a deep and deadly revenge against all mankind.

"Two months later, I finally reached Geneva. I hid in the fields, exhausted and hungry. As I rested, a beautiful little boy ran by. I thought that because he was so young, he wouldn't judge my ugly face. I decided to kidnap him and raise him as my friend.

"I grabbed him. When he saw my face, he screamed and covered his eyes. 'Let me go, you ugly monster!' he cried. 'You want to eat me! Let me go, or I will tell my papa! He is a powerful man—he is Monsieur Frankenstein!'

"'Frankenstein!' I yelled. 'You belong to my enemy! You will be my first victim.'

"He kept screaming, so I grabbed his throat to silence him. In a moment, he lay dead at my feet. My heart swelled with a sick, hellish triumph. I had finally caused despair for my enemy.

"I noticed a shiny locket around the boy's neck. I opened it and saw a portrait of a beautiful woman. For a moment, her lovely face softened my heart. But then I remembered that she would have looked at me with horror and disgust. I took the locket and ran.

"I hid in a barn and found a young woman sleeping in the hay. She was beautiful and peaceful. I knew that if she woke up, she would scream and call me a murderer. So, I decided she would pay for the crime instead. I slipped the portrait into the folds of her dress and fled into the mountains.

"I have wandered these icy mountains ever since, consumed by a burning passion that only you can satisfy. I am entirely alone. Humans will never accept me. But a creature as deformed and horrible as I am would not reject me. You must create a female companion for me."
