Chapter 22

The voyage came to an end. We landed and proceeded to Paris. I soon found that I had overtaxed my strength and that I must rest before I could continue my journey. My father's care and attentions were tireless. However, he did not know the origin of my sufferings and sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable illness. He wished me to seek amusement in society. I abhorred the face of man. Oh, not abhorred! They were my brethren, my fellow beings, and I felt attracted even to the most repulsive among them, viewing them as creatures of an angelic nature and celestial mechanism. But I felt that I had no right to share their company. I had unchained an enemy among them whose joy it was to shed their blood and revel in their groans. How they would all abhor me and hunt me from the world if they knew my unhallowed acts and the crimes that originated from me!

My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society. He strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that I deeply felt the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of murder. He endeavored to prove to me the futility of pride.

"Sadly, my father," I said, "how little do you know me. Human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded if such a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge. She died for it. And I am the cause of this. I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all died by my hands."

My father had often heard me make the same assertion during my imprisonment. When I accused myself like this, he sometimes seemed to desire an explanation. At other times he appeared to consider it as the offspring of delirium. He believed that during my illness, some idea of this kind had presented itself to my imagination, and I preserved the memory of it in my recovery. I avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence concerning the wretch I had created. I was persuaded that I would be supposed mad, and this in itself would forever have chained my tongue. Besides, I could not bring myself to disclose a secret that would fill my hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of his breast. Therefore, I checked my demanding thirst for sympathy. I remained silent when I would have given the world to confide the fatal secret. Yet still, words like those I have recorded would burst uncontrollably from me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe.

Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder, "My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this? My dear son, I entreat you never to make such an assertion again."

"I am not mad," I cried energetically. "The sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness to my truth. I am the assassin of those most innocent victims. They died by my plots. I would have shed my own blood a thousand times, drop by drop, to have saved their lives. But I could not, my father. Indeed I could not sacrifice the whole human race."

The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were deranged. He instantly changed the subject of our conversation and endeavored to alter the course of my thoughts. He wished to obliterate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in Ireland as much as possible. He never alluded to them or allowed me to speak of my misfortunes.

As time passed, I became calmer. Misery made its dwelling in my heart, but I no longer talked in the same incoherent manner about my own crimes. The consciousness of them was sufficient for me. By the utmost self-restraint, I curbed the demanding voice of wretchedness, which sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world. My manners were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey to the sea of ice.

A few days before we left Paris on our way to Switzerland, I received the following letter from Elizabeth:

"My dear Friend,

"It gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle dated at Paris. You are no longer at a formidable distance, and I may hope to see you in less than a fortnight. My poor cousin, how much you must have suffered! I expect to see you looking even more ill than when you quitted Geneva. This winter has passed most miserably, tortured as I have been by anxious suspense. Yet I hope to see peace in your face and to find that your heart is not totally devoid of comfort and tranquility.

"Yet I fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable a year ago, perhaps even increased by time. I would not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you. But a conversation that I had with my uncle prior to your departure renders some explanation necessary before we meet.

"Explanation! You may possibly say. What can Elizabeth have to explain? If you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts are satisfied. But you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread and yet be pleased with this explanation. In the probability of this being the case, I dare not postpone writing any longer. During your absence, I have often wished to express this to you but have never had the courage to begin.

"You well know, Victor, that our union had been the favorite plan of your parents ever since our infancy. We were told this when young and taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and I believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older. But as brother and sister often entertain a lively affection towards each other without desiring a more intimate union, may not such also be our case? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me, I conjure you by our mutual happiness, with simple truth. Do you not love another?

"You have traveled. You have spent several years of your life at Ingolstadt. I confess to you, my friend, that when I saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every creature, I could not help supposing that you might regret our connection. I thought you might believe yourself bound in honor to fulfill the wishes of your parents, even though they opposed your inclinations. But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, that I love you. In my airy dreams of the future, you have been my constant friend and companion. But it is your happiness I desire as well as my own when I declare to you that our marriage would render me eternally miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. Even now I weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruelest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word honor, all hope of that love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. I, who have so disinterested an affection for you, may increase your miseries tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes. Ah! Victor, be assured that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you not to be made miserable by this supposition. Be happy, my friend. If you obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth will have the power to interrupt my tranquility.

"Do not let this letter disturb you. Do not answer tomorrow, or the next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. My uncle will send me news of your health. If I see but one smile on your lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, I shall need no other happiness.

"Elizabeth Lavenza.

"Geneva, May 18th, 17--."

This letter revived in my memory what I had previously forgotten, the threat of the fiend: "I will be with you on your wedding-night!" Such was my sentence. On that night, the demon would employ every art to destroy me and tear me from the glimpse of happiness that promised to partly console my sufferings. On that night he had determined to consummate his crimes by my death. Well, be it so. A deadly struggle would assuredly take place then. If he were victorious, I should be at peace, and his power over me would be at an end. If he were vanquished, I should be a free man. Sadly! What freedom? It would be such as the peasant enjoys when his family has been massacred before his eyes, his cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless, penniless, and alone, but free. Such would be my liberty. Except that in my Elizabeth I possessed a treasure that would be balanced by horrors of remorse and guilt, pursuing me until death.

Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and reread her letter. Some softened feelings stole into my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal dreams of love and joy. But the apple was already eaten, and the angel's arm was bared to drive me from all hope. Yet I would die to make her happy. If the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable. Yet, again, I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. My destruction might arrive a few months sooner, but if my torturer should suspect that I postponed it, influenced by his menaces, he would surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. He had vowed to be with me on my wedding-night. Yet he did not consider that threat as binding him to peace in the meantime. As if to show me that he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after announcing his threats. Therefore, I resolved that if my immediate union with my cousin would contribute either to hers or my father's happiness, my adversary's designs against my life should not retard it a single hour.

In this state of mind I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was calm and affectionate. "I fear, my beloved girl," I said, "little happiness remains for us on earth. Yet all that I may one day enjoy is centered in you. Chase away your idle fears. To you alone do I consecrate my life and my endeavors for contentment. I have one secret, Elizabeth, a dreadful one. When it is revealed to you, it will chill your frame with horror. Then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only wonder that I survive what I have endured. I will confide this tale of misery and terror to you the day after our marriage takes place. For, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us. But until then, I conjure you, do not mention or allude to it. I most earnestly entreat this, and I know you will comply."

About a week after the arrival of Elizabeth's letter, we returned to Geneva. The sweet girl welcomed me with warm affection, yet tears were in her eyes as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. I saw a change in her also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had charmed me before. But her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for someone as blasted and miserable as I was.

The tranquility I now enjoyed did not endure. Memory brought madness with it, and when I thought of what had passed, a real insanity possessed me. Sometimes I was furious and burned with rage, and sometimes low and despondent. I neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat motionless, bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me.

Elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits. Her gentle voice would soothe me when transported by passion and inspire me with human feelings when sunk in numbness. She wept with me and for me. When reason returned, she would remonstrate and endeavor to inspire me with resignation. Ah! It is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the guilty there is no peace. The agonies of remorse poison the luxury that is sometimes found in indulging the excess of grief.

Soon after our arrival, my father spoke of my immediate marriage with Elizabeth. I remained silent.

"Do you have some other attachment, then?"

"None on earth. I love Elizabeth and look forward to our union with delight. Let the day therefore be fixed. And on it I will consecrate myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin."

"My dear Victor, do not speak like this. Heavy misfortunes have befallen us. But let us only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love for those whom we have lost to those who yet live. Our circle will be small but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune. When time has softened your despair, new and dear objects of care will be born to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly deprived."

Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the remembrance of the threat returned. Nor can you wonder that, given how all-powerful the fiend had been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as invincible. When he had pronounced the words "I shall be with you on your wedding-night," I regarded the threatened fate as unavoidable. But death was no evil to me if the loss of Elizabeth were balanced with it. Therefore, with a contented and even cheerful face, I agreed with my father that if my cousin consented, the ceremony should take place in ten days. Thus I imagined I put the seal to my fate.

Great God! If I had thought for one instant what the hellish intention of my fiendish adversary might be, I would rather have banished myself forever from my native country and wandered as a friendless outcast over the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage. But, as if possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded me to his real intentions. When I thought that I had prepared only my own death, I hastened that of a far dearer victim.

As the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice or a prophetic feeling, I felt my heart sink within me. But I concealed my feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the face of my father. It hardly deceived the ever-watchful and keener eye of Elizabeth, however. She looked forward to our union with placid contentment. This was mingled with a little fear, impressed by past misfortunes, that what now appeared as certain and tangible happiness might soon fade away into an airy dream, leaving no trace but deep and everlasting regret.

Preparations were made for the event. Congratulatory visits were received, and everything wore a smiling appearance. As well as I could, I shut the anxiety that preyed there up in my own heart. I entered with seeming earnestness into my father's plans, although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy. Through my father's exertions, a part of Elizabeth's inheritance had been restored to her by the Austrian government. A small estate on the shores of Como belonged to her. It was agreed that immediately after our union, we should proceed to Villa Lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood.

In the meantime, I took every precaution to defend my person in case the fiend should openly attack me. I constantly carried pistols and a dagger. I was ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and by these means I gained a greater degree of tranquility. Indeed, as the period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, unworthy to disturb my peace. The happiness I hoped for in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as the day fixed for its celebration drew nearer. I heard it continually spoken of as an occurrence that no accident could possibly prevent.

Elizabeth seemed happy. My tranquil demeanor contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day that was to fulfill my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy. A presentiment of evil pervaded her. Perhaps she also thought of the dreadful secret that I had promised to reveal to her on the following day. In the meantime, my father was overjoyed. In the bustle of preparation, he only recognized the diffidence of a bride in his niece's melancholy.

After the ceremony was performed, a large party assembled at my father's. It was agreed that Elizabeth and I should commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day. The day was fair, and the wind favorable. Everything smiled on our nuptial embarkation.

Those were the last moments of my life during which I enjoyed the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along. The sun was hot, but we were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the beauty of the scene. Sometimes we were on one side of the lake, where we saw Mont Salêve, the pleasant banks of Montalègre, and at a distance, surmounting all, the beautiful Mont Blanc and the assemblage of snowy mountains that vainly endeavor to emulate it. Coasting the opposite banks, we sometimes saw the mighty Jura. It opposed its dark side to the ambition that would quit its native country, acting as an almost insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it.

I took Elizabeth's hand. "You are sorrowful, my love. Ah! If you knew what I have suffered and what I may yet endure, you would endeavor to let me taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this one day at least permits me to enjoy."

"Be happy, my dear Victor," Elizabeth replied. "There is nothing to distress you, I hope. And be assured that if a lively joy is not painted in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but I will not listen to such a sinister voice. Observe how fast we move along. See how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise above the dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene of beauty still more interesting. Look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at the bottom. What a divine day! How happy and serene all nature appears!"

Thus Elizabeth endeavored to divert her thoughts and mine from all reflection upon melancholy subjects. But her temper was fluctuating. Joy shone in her eyes for a few instants, but it continually gave way to distraction and reverie.

The sun sank lower in the heavens. We passed the river Drance and observed its path through the chasms of the higher hills and the glens of the lower hills. The Alps come closer to the lake here, and we approached the amphitheater of mountains that forms its eastern boundary. The spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the range of mountain above mountain that overhung it.

The wind had hitherto carried us along with amazing rapidity, but it sank at sunset to a light breeze. The soft air just ruffled the water and caused a pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the shore. From there it wafted the most delicious scent of flowers and hay. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed. As I touched the shore, I felt those cares and fears revive that were soon to clasp me and cling to me forever.
