Chapter 23

It was eight o'clock when we landed. We walked for a short time on the shore. We enjoyed the fading light. Then we retired to the inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains. The view was obscured in darkness, but it still displayed black outlines.

The wind had fallen in the south, but it now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached its peak in the heavens and was beginning to set. The clouds swept across it swifter than the flight of a vulture and dimmed its rays. The lake reflected the busy heavens, rendered even busier by the restless waves that were beginning to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended.

I had been calm during the day. But as soon as night obscured the shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind. I was anxious and watchful. My right hand grasped a pistol hidden in my coat. Every sound terrified me. I resolved that I would sell my life dearly. I would not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that of my adversary was extinguished.

Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence. But there was something in my glance that communicated terror to her. Trembling, she asked, "What is it that agitates you, my dear Victor? What is it you fear?"

"Oh! Peace, peace, my love," I replied. "This night, all will be safe. But this night is dreadful, very dreadful."

I passed an hour in this state of mind. Suddenly I reflected how fearful the combat I momentarily expected would be to my wife. I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had obtained some knowledge about the situation of my enemy.

She left me. I continued for some time walking up and down the passages of the house. I inspected every corner that might afford a retreat to my adversary. I discovered no trace of him. I was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of his threats. Suddenly I heard a shrill and dreadful scream. It came from the room into which Elizabeth had retired. As I heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind. My arms dropped. The motion of every muscle and fiber was suspended. I could feel the blood trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. This state lasted but for an instant. The scream was repeated, and I rushed into the room.

Great God! Why did I not expire then! Why am I here to relate the destruction of the best hope and the purest creature of earth? She was there, lifeless and inanimate. She was thrown across the bed. Her head hung down, and her pale and distorted features were half covered by her hair. Everywhere I turn I see the same figure—her bloodless arms and relaxed form flung by the murderer on its bridal bier. Could I behold this and live? Sadly, life is obstinate and clings closest where it is most hated. For a moment only did I lose recollection. I fell senseless on the ground.

When I recovered, I found myself surrounded by the people of the inn. Their faces expressed breathless terror, but the horror of others appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the room where the body of Elizabeth lay. My love, my wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. She had been moved from the posture in which I had first beheld her. Now, as she lay with her head upon her arm and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, I might have supposed she was asleep. I rushed towards her and embraced her with ardor. But the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told me that what I now held in my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth I loved and cherished. The murderous mark of the fiend's grasp was on her neck. Her breath had ceased to issue from her lips.

While I still hung over her in the agony of despair, I happened to look up. The windows of the room had previously been darkened. I felt a kind of panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber. The shutters had been thrown back. With an indescribable sensation of horror, I saw a hideous and abhorred figure at the open window. A grin was on the face of the monster. He seemed to jeer, as he pointed towards the corpse of my wife with his fiendish finger. I rushed towards the window. I drew a pistol from my coat and fired. But he eluded me, leaped from his station, and ran with the swiftness of lightning. He plunged into the lake.

The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I pointed to the spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with boats. Nets were cast, but it was in vain. After passing several hours, we returned hopeless. Most of my companions believed it to have been a form conjured up by my imagination. After landing, they proceeded to search the country, with parties going in different directions among the woods and vines.

I attempted to accompany them. I proceeded a short distance from the house, but my head whirled around. My steps were like those of a drunken man. I fell at last in a state of utter exhaustion. A film covered my eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. In this state I was carried back and placed on a bed. I was hardly conscious of what had happened. My eyes wandered around the room as if seeking something I had lost.

After an interval I arose. As if by instinct, I crawled into the room where the corpse of my beloved lay. There were women weeping around. I hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs. All this time no distinct idea presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to various subjects. I reflected confusedly on my misfortunes and their cause. I was bewildered in a cloud of wonder and horror. The death of William, the execution of Justine, the murder of Clerval, and lastly of my wife. Even at that moment I did not know that my only remaining friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend. My father might be writhing under his grasp even now. Ernest might be dead at his feet. This idea made me shudder and recalled me to action. I started up and resolved to return to Geneva with all possible speed.

There were no horses to be procured, so I had to return by the lake. The wind was unfavorable, and the rain fell in torrents. However, it was hardly morning, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself. I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt and the excess of agitation I endured rendered me incapable of any exertion. I threw down the oar. Leaning my face upon my hands, I gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes that were familiar to me in my happier times. I had contemplated them just the day before in the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes. The rain ceased for a moment, and I saw the fish play in the waters as they had done a few hours before. They had been observed by Elizabeth then. Nothing is as painful to the human mind as a great and sudden change. The sun might shine or the clouds might lower, but nothing could appear to me as it had done the day before. A fiend had snatched every hope of future happiness from me. No creature had ever been as miserable as I was. So frightful an event is unique in the history of man.

But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last overwhelming event? Mine has been a tale of horrors. I have reached their peak, and what I must now relate can only be tedious to you. Know that, one by one, my friends were snatched away. I was left desolate. My own strength is exhausted, and I must tell what remains of my hideous narration in a few words.

I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest still lived. But my father sank under the tidings I bore. I see him now, an excellent and venerable old man! His eyes wandered in vacancy. They had lost their charm and their delight. His Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with all the affection a man feels. In the decline of life, having few affections, he clung more earnestly to those that remained. Cursed be the fiend that brought misery on his gray hairs and doomed him to waste in wretchedness! He could not live under the horrors accumulated around him. The springs of existence suddenly gave way. He was unable to rise from his bed, and in a few days he died in my arms.

What then became of me? I do not know. I lost sensation. Chains and darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. Sometimes I dreamed that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth. But I awoke and found myself in a dungeon. Melancholy followed. By degrees I gained a clear conception of my miseries and situation, and I was then released from my prison. They had called me mad. For many months, as I understood, a solitary cell had been my habitation.

Liberty, however, would have been a useless gift to me if I had not awakened to revenge at the same time I awakened to reason. As the memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, I began to reflect on their cause. I thought of the monster I had created, the miserable demon I had sent abroad into the world for my destruction. I was possessed by a maddening rage when I thought of him. I ardently prayed that I might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and signal revenge on his cursed head.

My hate did not confine itself to useless wishes for long. I began to reflect on the best means of securing him. For this purpose, about a month after my release, I went to a criminal judge in the town. I told him that I had an accusation to make. I stated that I knew the destroyer of my family, and I required him to exert his full authority for the apprehension of the murderer.

The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. "Be assured, sir," he said, "no effort on my part shall be spared to discover the villain."

"I thank you," I replied. "Listen, therefore, to the deposition that I have to make. It is a tale so strange that I fear you would not credit it, were there not something in truth which forces conviction. The story is too connected to be mistaken for a dream, and I have no motive for falsehood." My manner as I addressed him was impressive but calm. I had formed a resolution to pursue my destroyer to the death, and this purpose quieted my agony and reconciled me to life for a time. I now related my history briefly but with firmness and precision. I marked the dates with accuracy and never deviated into invective or exclamation.

The magistrate appeared perfectly incredulous at first. But as I continued, he became more attentive and interested. I saw him sometimes shudder with horror. At other times a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his face.

When I had concluded my narration, I said, "This is the being whom I accuse. For his seizure and punishment, I call upon you to exert your whole power. It is your duty as a magistrate. I believe and hope that your feelings as a man will not revolt from the execution of those functions on this occasion."

This address caused a considerable change in the expression of my listener. He had heard my story with the half-belief given to a tale of spirits and supernatural events. But when he was called upon to act officially as a result, the whole tide of his incredulity returned. He answered mildly, however. "I would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit, but the creature you speak of appears to have powers that would put all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an animal that can traverse the sea of ice and inhabit caves and dens where no man would venture to intrude? Besides, some months have elapsed since the commission of his crimes. No one can conjecture where he has wandered or what region he may now inhabit."

"I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot where I live. If he has indeed taken refuge in the Alps, he may be hunted like the chamois and destroyed as a beast of prey. But I perceive your thoughts. You do not credit my narrative, and you do not intend to pursue my enemy with the punishment he deserves."

As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes. The magistrate was intimidated. "You are mistaken," he said. "I will exert myself. If it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer punishment proportionate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have described to be his properties, that this will prove impracticable. Therefore, while every proper measure is pursued, you should make up your mind to disappointment."

"That cannot be. But all that I can say will be of little use. My revenge is of no importance to you. Yet, while I allow it to be a vice, I confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. My rage is unspeakable when I reflect that the murderer I turned loose upon society still exists. You refuse my just demand. I have only one resource. I devote myself, either in my life or death, to his destruction."

I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this. There was a frenzy in my manner, and something of the haughty fierceness that the martyrs of old are said to have possessed. But to a Genevan magistrate, whose mind was occupied by ideas far different from devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind looked much like madness. He endeavored to soothe me as a nurse does a child and reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.

"Man," I cried, "how ignorant you are in your pride of wisdom! Cease. You do not know what you are saying."

I broke from the house angry and disturbed. I retired to meditate on some other course of action.
