[Chapter 25]
So we both agree that wealth is desirable. Learn why I include wealth among good things. Learn how I will act differently from you when I own them. Put me as the master of a very rich house. Put me where gold and silver dishes are used for the most common purposes. I will never value myself higher because of things that are never part of myself. I will do this even if they are in my house. Take me to a wooden bridge and put me down among beggars. I will not despise myself just because I sit among people who hold out their hands to beg. Why does missing a piece of bread matter to a person who has the ability to die? Then what is the difference? I prefer a grand house to a beggar's bridge. Put me among fancy furniture and all the tools of luxury. I will not think I have become any happier just because my cloak is soft. I will not think this just because my guests rest on purple carpets. Change the scene. I will not become more miserable even if my tired head rests on a pile of hay. I will not become more miserable if I lie on a cushion with its stuffing spilling out through worn-out rags. Then what is the difference? I prefer to stand in front of the public wearing simple clothes or official robes rather than having bare or half-covered shoulders. I wish my daily work would go as I wish. I wish new greetings of congratulations would constantly follow previous ones. But I will never boast about this. Change all this good luck into the opposite. Let my spirit be scattered by loss, sadness, and various kinds of attacks. Let not a single hour pass without some argument. I will not call myself the most miserable being for this reason even if I am surrounded by the greatest misery. I will not curse any specific day. I have been careful not to have any unlucky day. Then what is the conclusion of all this? The conclusion is that I prefer controlling joy over holding back sadness. The great Socrates will tell you the exact same thing. He will say this. "Make me the conqueror of all nations. Let a sensual carriage take me in a victory march from the rising sun to Thebes. Let the kings of Persia receive laws from me. But I will still feel that I am just a human being at the exact moment when everyone around me calls me a god and worships me. Now immediately connect that noble height with a fall plunging into bad luck. Put me on a foreign chariot and let me decorate the victory march of a proud and savage conqueror. I will follow behind another person's carriage with the exact same humility I showed when I stood in my own carriage. Then what is the difference? In spite of all this, I want to be a conqueror rather than a prisoner. I despise all control of fortune. But I will choose the better parts of fortune if I am given a choice. I will make whatever happens to me into a good thing. But I prefer things that are comfortable, pleasant, and will not annoy me." You must think that no Virtue exists without hard work. But some Virtues need spurs and some Virtues need reins. We must hold our bodies back on downhill roads and whip our bodies to climb on steep roads. In the same way, some paths of Virtue lead downhill and some paths lead uphill. Who can doubt that patience, bravery, perseverance, and other Virtues are climbing steep uphills, struggling, and opening paths? These Virtues must trample fortune underfoot against strong opposition. On the other hand, is it not equally clear that generosity, moderation, and gentleness slide down a downhill road easily? We must hold our spirit so it does not run away with us in the second case. We must push it and spur it on in the first case. Therefore, we must apply these active and fighting Virtues to poverty. We must apply the more saving Virtues to wealth. These Virtues jump lightly and just support their own weight. Looking at this difference between them, I prefer to handle Virtues that can be practiced in a relatively quiet environment rather than Virtues that can only be tested through blood and sweat. Therefore, the wise person says he does not speak one way and act another. You just do not understand what I am saying properly. Only the sound of my words reaches your ears. You do not try to find their meaning.
