[Chapter 4]
We can also define our Highest Good in other ways. We can express the same idea in different words. The same army can spread out wider at times and squeeze into a narrower space at other times. The center line can curve inward toward the wings or stand in a straight line. But the strength and loyalty of that army do not change no matter what formation it takes. Our definition of the Highest Good is the same. We can express it in a long and wordy way in some cases. We can present it in a short and simple form in other cases. Therefore, we can say that the Highest Good is a mind that despises the accidents of fortune and feels joy in Virtue. Or we can say it is an unyielding mental strength that understands the world well, acts gently, and shows great politeness and consideration to others. Both mean the same thing. Or we can define it by calling a person happy if he only knows good and bad things in the form of a good and bad mind. This kind of person respects honor and is satisfied with his own Virtue. Good fortune does not make him arrogant, and bad fortune does not discourage him. He does not know any other good besides what he can give himself. His true joy lies in rejecting Pleasure. If you want to continue this discussion, you can change this same concept into many other forms without ruining or weakening its meaning. Who would stop us from saying that a free, upright, fearless, and firm mind beyond the influence of fear or desire makes a happy life? This mind considers nothing good except honor. It considers nothing bad except disgrace. It views all other things as a pile of trivial and meaningless things that come and go. These things can add or subtract nothing from the happiness of life. They do not increase or decrease the Highest Good. A person with these principles will have constant cheerfulness and noble happiness whether he wants it or not. He rejoices in what he has. He does not wish for greater Pleasure than what his home provides. Therefore, this happiness truly comes from a high place. Is it not right to let these principles tip the scales against the trivial, ridiculous, and fleeting movements of the miserable body? The day a person endures the attack of Pleasure, he also becomes a person who endures the attack of pain. On the other hand, look at the evil and sinful slavery a person must endure when Pleasure and pain alternately rule him. They are the most unreliable and passionate masters. Therefore, we must escape from them and move toward freedom. Nothing but the contempt of fortune will give us this freedom. But if we reach this point, truly valuable blessings will dawn upon us. They are the rest of a mind anchored in a safe harbor, the noble imagination of the mind, the large and unchanging joy of driving away errors and knowing the truth, the politeness of the mind, and cheerfulness. We will enjoy all these things without simply viewing them as good things. We will accept them as coming from the unique goodness of human beings.
