[Chapter 2]
When we discuss a happy life, you cannot answer me like you would in a vote. You cannot say that this opinion has the most support. That is exactly why it becomes the worse of the two choices. The condition of humanity is not so great that the majority prefers the better path. The more people do something, the more likely it is to be bad. Therefore, we must not ask what is most commonly done. We must ask what is best for us to do. We must ask what can firmly establish us as owners of unchanging happiness. We must not ask what the common crowd approves. The crowd is the worst speaker for explaining truth. When I say the common crowd, I mean both the poor people wearing simple wool cloaks and the rich people wearing crowns. I do not care about the color of the clothes they wear. I do not try to see a person's true nature with my eyes. I have a much better and more reliable light to tell true from false. Let the mind discover for itself what is good for the mind. A person should allow his mind space to breathe and time to talk with himself. After he questions himself, he will confess a truth to himself. He will say that he wishes he had never done all the things he has done so far. When he remembers his words, he will envy deaf and mute people. All the things he desired will look like things his enemies would have prayed for. He will realize that the things he feared are much easier to endure than the things he greedily chased. He was enemies with many people. He turned his hatred for them into friendship, if friendship can exist among bad people. But he still has not made peace with himself. I tried with all my strength to raise myself above the common crowd and stand out with some talent. But what did that achieve? It only made me a target for the arrows of my enemies. It only showed my haters where to hurt me. Do you see the people who praise your speech, want your wealth, flatter you for favors, or boast of your power? All these people are your enemies. Or they can become your enemies at any time. This means the same thing. The number of people who envy you is just as large as the number of people who look up to you. Is it not better to seek a true good that I can actually use and feel, instead of something just for show? People look at these things in wonder. They flock to see them. They point them out to each other in speechless admiration. These good things are brilliant on the outside. But misery hides inside them for the people who own them.
