[Chapter 17]
Therefore, one of those dogs barking at philosophy might say this as usual. "Why do you speak much more bravely than you live? Why do you hold back your words in front of a superior and consider money a necessary tool? Why are you shaken when you suffer a loss, and cry when you hear news of the death of your wife or friend? Why do you care about public rumors and get annoyed by mean gossip? Why is your estate decorated more elaborately than natural needs require? Why do you not eat according to your own sayings? Why is your furniture fancier than needed? Why do you drink wine older than yourself? Why do you arrange a garden and plant trees that give nothing but shade? Why does your wife wear earrings that cost as much as a rich house? Why do your children going to school wear expensive clothes? Why has serving you at the table become a science? Why is your silverware not placed randomly, but skillfully arranged in a set order, and why do you even have a manager watching the carving of meat?" Add the following questions here if you want. "Why do you have property across the sea? Why do you own more things than you know? It is shameful that you do not even know the faces of your slaves. If you only own a few slaves and this happens, you are very careless about them. If you own too many slaves for your memory to handle, you are very luxurious." I will add a few more criticisms later. I will pour more criticisms on myself than you think. But for now, I will answer you like this. "I am not a wise person, and I will not become a wise person to satisfy your malice. So do not ask me to be on the same level as the best people. Just ask me to be better than the worst people. I am satisfied if I take away something from my vices and correct my faults every day. I have not reached the perfect health of the mind, and in fact I never will. I am just mixing painkillers to relieve the pain rather than a cure to heal the sickness. I am satisfied if the sickness comes a little less often and does not ache as painfully as before. I am a fast runner compared to your lame feet." I do not say this to defend myself. I am deeply stuck in all kinds of vices. I say this for the person who makes some progress toward Virtue.
