[Chapter 11]
When I say I do nothing for Pleasure, I talk about that wise person who you claim is the only one who can handle Pleasure. But I never call a person wise if anything overwhelms him. Pleasure definitely should not overwhelm him. How can a person deep in Pleasure endure the hard work, danger, poverty, and disasters that threaten human life? How can he handle the terrible sight of death or pain? How can someone conquered by such a weak enemy fight the noise of the world and face so many active enemies? He will do whatever Pleasure advises. Do you not see how many things Pleasure will urge him to do? Our opponent might say that Pleasure will not give him bad advice because Virtue connects with Pleasure. I ask you again. Do you not see how worthless this Highest Good is if it needs a guardian to become good in the first place? How can Virtue control Pleasure if Virtue follows Pleasure? Following is the duty of a subordinate. Controlling is the duty of a commander. Do you want to put the commander in the back? Your school claims that Virtue has the noble job of testing Pleasure first. But we will see if Virtue can remain Virtue among those who treat her with contempt. If Virtue leaves her place, she can no longer keep her name. Meanwhile, I will return to the main point. I will prove that the many people surrounded by Pleasure are actually evil people. Fortune pours all kinds of gifts on them, but they are still evil. You must admit this fact too. Look at gluttonous men like Nomentanus and Apicius. They digest all the good things of land and sea. They spread the whole animal kingdom on their tables. Look at them lying greedily on beds of roses and enjoying their feasts. They please their ears with music, their eyes with sights, and their taste with all kinds of flavors. Their whole bodies feel thrilling Pleasure from soft and sweet massages. Even their noses do not rest. The place where they perform their rituals of luxury fills with all kinds of perfume. You will say these people live in the middle of Pleasure. But they are never at peace. They take Pleasure from things that are not good.
