[Chapter 23]
So stop forbidding philosophers from owning money. No one has ever condemned wisdom to poverty. A philosopher can also own rich wealth. He just does not own wealth stolen from others or stained with the blood of other people. He must not gain his wealth by treating anyone unfairly or by using mean methods. He must spend it honorably, just as he gained it honorably. It must be something that only malice can shake its head at. Try to increase his wealth as much as you want. It will still be an honorable possession. This is true even if it includes many things that everyone wants to call their own, but no one can truly say they own them. Such a person will not lose his right to receive the favor of fortune. He will not boast about it or be ashamed of it if he gained his inheritance honorably. Instead, he will open the doors of his house wide and let all his fellow citizens walk among his property. He truly has something to boast about if he can say that anyone who finds anything he thinks belongs to him here can take it. How great a person and how excellent a rich man he would be if he still owned the same amount of property after saying this! In other words, such a person deserves to enjoy his wealth boldly and openly if he can safely and confidently submit his account books to the close inspection of people and no one can find any item to lay their hands on. A wise person will not let a single penny of wrongly gained money cross his doorstep. But he will not reject it or shut his door to it if huge wealth is a gift of fortune and a product of Virtue. Why should he grudge giving them a good place to stay? Let them come and be his guests. He will not show them off or hide them. Showing off is a sign of a foolish mind. Hiding is a sign of a timid and weak mind. It is like hiding a good thing in one's lap. As I said before, he will not kick them out of his house either. What will he say? Will he say they are useless or he does not know how to use wealth? He will prefer to ride in a carriage even though he has the ability to finish his journey on his two feet. In the same way, he will wish to be rich even though he can be poor. He will own wealth, but he will view it as an uncertain possession that will fly away from him someday. He will not let that wealth become a burden to himself or to others. He will give it away. Why do you prick up your ears and open your pockets? He will give that wealth to good people, or to people who can become good through it. He will choose the best person to receive the wealth with his greatest effort before he gives it. He will act like a person who keeps in mind that he must be able to explain what he spends as well as what he receives. He will give for a good and praiseworthy reason. A wrongly given gift is considered a shameful loss. He will have a pocket that opens easily, but he will not have a pocket with holes in it. Therefore, he can take out and give many things, but he will not spill anything.
