CHAPTER XI.
A Companion Picture

"Sydney," Mr. Stryver said to his assistant on that same night, or rather morning, "mix another bowl of punch. I have something to tell you."

Sydney had been working double shifts that night, the night before, and for many nights in a row, clearing out Mr. Stryver's legal papers before the start of the summer court vacation. The work was finally done. Stryver’s backlogged cases were completely caught up, leaving everything clear until November when the winter weather and new legal cases would bring work back again.

Sydney was neither more energetic nor more sober for all his hard work. It had taken extra wet towels wrapped around his head to get him through the night, preceded by a large amount of wine. He looked in very poor shape as he took his makeshift turban off and threw it into the basin of water where he had been soaking it for the last six hours.

"Are you mixing that other bowl of punch?" the portly Stryver asked, lying on his back on the sofa with his hands on his belt.

"I am."

"Now, look here! I am going to tell you something that will surprise you, and might make you think I'm not as clever as you usually believe. I plan to marry."

"Do you?"

"Yes. And not for money. What do you say to that?"

"I don't have much to say. Who is she?"

"Guess."

"Do I know her?"

"Guess."

"I am not guessing at five o'clock in the morning, with my brain fried and exhausted. If you want me to guess, you'll have to invite me to dinner."

"Well, then, I'll tell you," said Stryver, slowly sitting up. "Sydney, I despair of explaining this to you, because you are such an unfeeling dog."

"And you," Sydney replied, busy mixing the punch, "are such a sensitive and romantic soul."

"Come on!" Stryver laughed boastfully. "While I don't claim to be a romantic hero, I am still a much warmer person than _you_."

"You are luckier, if that's what you mean."

"I don't mean that. I mean I am a man of more—more—"

"Say gallantry, while you're at it," Carton suggested.

"Well, I'll say gallantry. I mean that I am a man," Stryver said, looking proudly at his friend, "who cares more about being pleasant, who takes more trouble to be pleasant, and who knows better how to behave in a woman's company than you do."

"Go on," said Sydney Carton.

"No, but before I continue," Stryver said, shaking his head in his usual bullying way, "I want to settle this with you. You've been to Doctor Manette's house as much as I have, or more. I have actually been embarrassed by your behavior there! You sit there silent and gloomy. I've been ashamed of your manners, Sydney!"

"It must be very useful for a lawyer like you to feel ashamed of anything," Sydney replied. "You should thank me."

"You won't get out of it that way," Stryver argued. "No, Sydney, it's my duty to tell you—and I tell you to your face for your own good—that you are a very unpleasant fellow in social gatherings. You are disagreeable."

Sydney drank a large glass of the punch he had made and laughed.

"Look at me!" Stryver said, squaring his shoulders. "I have less need to be polite than you do, since I am wealthier and more independent. Why do I do it?"

"I've never seen you do it yet," Carton muttered.

"I do it because it is smart business; I do it on principle. And look at me! I succeed."

"You aren't succeeding in telling me about your marriage plans," Carton answered carelessly. "I wish you would stick to that. As for me—will you never understand that I cannot be reformed?"

He asked the question with a hint of scorn.

"You have no right to be unreformed," his friend answered sharply.

"I have no right to exist at all, as far as I know," said Sydney Carton. "Who is the lady?"

"Now, don't let the name make you uncomfortable, Sydney," Mr. Stryver said, preparing him with a show of friendliness. "I know you don't mean half of what you say, and even if you did, it wouldn't matter. I say this because you once spoke of the young lady in a dismissive way."

"I did?"

"Certainly, right here in these offices."

Sydney Carton looked at his drink, then at his smug friend. He drank and looked at him again.

"You called the young lady a golden-haired doll. The lady is Miss Manette. If you were a sensitive fellow, Sydney, I might be angry with you for using such a term, but you aren't. You lack that sensitivity entirely. Therefore, I am no more annoyed by your opinion than I would be by a blind man's opinion of my painting, or a deaf man's opinion of my music."

Sydney Carton drank the punch quickly, glass after glass, staring at his friend.

"Now you know all about it, Syd," Mr. Stryver said. "I don't care about a fortune. She is a charming girl, and I have decided to please myself. On the whole, I think I can afford to please myself. In me, she will have a wealthy husband, a rapidly rising lawyer, and a man of distinction. It is a great opportunity for her, and she deserves it. Are you surprised?"

Carton, still drinking, replied, "Why should I be surprised?"

"Do you approve?"

Carton, still drinking, replied, "Why should I not approve?"

"Well!" said Stryver. "You take it more easily than I expected, and you aren't as greedy on my behalf as I thought you would be. Though you know by now that your old friend has a strong will. Yes, Sydney, I have had enough of this bachelor life. It is nice for a man to have a home to go to when he wants (and when he doesn't, he can stay away). I think Miss Manette will look good in high society and will always do me credit. So I have made up my mind. And now, Sydney, I want to give _you_ some advice about _your_ future. You are in a bad way, you know. You don't know the value of money, you live too hard, and you will ruin your health one day and end up sick and poor. You really ought to find a wife to look after you."

The smug, patronizing tone in which he spoke made him look twice as big and far more offensive.

"Let me recommend you," Stryver continued, "to face the facts. I have faced them in my own way; you should do the same. Marry. Find someone to take care of you. Don't worry that you don't understand women or have no social skills. Just find someone. Find a respectable woman with a little money—perhaps a landlady or someone who lets lodgings—and marry her to secure your future. Think about it, Sydney."

"I'll think of it," said Sydney.
