CHAPTER XX.
A Plea

When the newly married couple returned home, the first person to offer his congratulations was Sydney Carton. They had been home for only a few hours when he arrived. He had not improved in his habits, appearance, or manners, but Charles Darnay noticed a new, rugged look of loyalty in him.

Carton waited for an opportunity to take Darnay aside by the window, where no one else could hear them speak.

"Mr. Darnay," Carton said, "I wish we might be friends."

"We are already friends, I hope."

"You are polite enough to say so as a formality, but I don't mean it as a mere formality. Indeed, when I say I wish we might be friends, I don't even mean exactly that, either."

Charles Darnay naturally asked him, in a friendly and good-natured way, what he did mean.

"Honestly," Carton said with a smile, "I find that easier to understand in my own mind than to explain to you. But let me try. You remember a certain occasion when I was more drunk than usual?"

"I remember an occasion when you made me admit you had been drinking."

"I remember it too. The regret of those moments weighs heavily on me, because I always remember them. I hope that will be taken into account one day when my life is over! Don't worry; I'm not going to give you a sermon."

"I am not worried at all. Sincerity in you is not alarming to me."

"Ah!" Carton said, waving his hand as if dismissing the thought. "On that occasion—one of many, as you know—I was obnoxious about whether I liked you or not. I wish you would forget it."

"I forgot it long ago."

"Another polite formality! But, Mr. Darnay, forgetting is not as easy for me as you say it is for you. I haven't forgotten it, and a casual reply doesn't help me forget."

"If it was a casual reply," Darnay said, "I ask your forgiveness. I only wanted to dismiss a minor thing that seems to worry you too much. I assure you, on my honor as a gentleman, that I have forgotten it. And really, what was there to dismiss compared to the great help you gave me that day?"

"As for that help," Carton said, "I must admit that it was just professional legal showmanship. I don't know that I cared what happened to you when I did it. Remember, I am speaking of the past."

"You make light of the favor," Darnay replied, "but I won't argue with your reply."

"It's the absolute truth, Mr. Darnay, believe me! But I have wandered from my point; I was speaking of our friendship. You know me; you know I am incapable of the better qualities of men. If you doubt it, ask Stryver, and he’ll tell you so."

"I prefer to form my own opinion, without his help."

"Well! At any rate, you know me as a ruined man who has never done any good, and never will."

"I don't know that you 'never will.'"

"But I do, and you must take my word for it. Well! If you can tolerate having such a worthless fellow with a bad reputation visiting at odd times, I ask that I might be allowed to visit as a privileged guest. I would be like a useless piece of furniture, tolerated for past services and ignored. I doubt I would abuse the privilege; I probably wouldn't visit more than four times a year. It would simply comfort me to know I had the permission."

"Will you try?"

"That means I am accepted on those terms. Thank you, Darnay. May I use your first name?"

"I think so, Carton, by this time."

They shook hands, and Sydney turned away. Within a minute, he returned to his usual careless manner.

When he was gone, during an evening spent with Miss Pross, the Doctor, and Mr. Lorry, Charles Darnay mentioned this talk. He described Sydney Carton as a puzzle of carelessness and irresponsibility. He did not speak bitterly, but simply as anyone would who saw Carton as he presented himself.

He had no idea that his young wife was thinking deeply about this. But when he joined her in their room later, he found her waiting for him with a serious look on her face.

"You look thoughtful tonight!" Darnay said, putting his arm around her.

"Yes, dearest Charles," she said, placing her hands on his chest and looking at him closely. "I am rather thoughtful tonight, because I have something on my mind."

"What is it, my Lucie?"

"Will you promise not to ask me why, if I beg you not to ask?"

"Will I promise? What wouldn't I promise to my love?"

He pushed her golden hair back from her cheek, holding her close.

"I think, Charles, that poor Mr. Carton deserves more respect and consideration than you showed for him tonight."

"Really, my love? Why so?"

"That is what you must not ask me. But I think—I know—he does."

"If you know it, that is enough. What do you want me to do, my life?"

"I ask you, dearest, to always be very generous with him, and very lenient about his faults when he is not here. I want you to believe that he has a heart he rarely reveals, and that there are deep wounds in it. Dearest, I have seen his heart bleeding."

"It makes me sad," Charles Darnay said in surprise, "to think I have wronged him. I never thought this of him."

"My husband, it is true. I fear he cannot be reformed; there is little hope for his character or future. But I am sure he is capable of good, gentle, and noble things."

She looked so beautiful in her faith in this lost man that her husband could have stared at her for hours.

"And, oh my dearest love!" she urged, clinging closer to him and looking into his eyes. "Remember how happy and strong we are, and how weak he is in his misery!"

Her plea touched his heart. "I will always remember it, my love! I will remember it as long as I live."

He bent over her, kissing her lips and holding her in his arms. If the lonely wanderer walking the dark streets outside could have heard her words and seen her husband kiss away her tears of pity, he might have cried out to the night:

"God bless her for her sweet compassion!"
