“We soon reached his cave, but he was out shepherding, so we went
inside and took stock of all that we could see. His cheese-racks were
loaded with cheeses, and he had more lambs and kids than his pens could
hold. They were kept in separate flocks; first there were the hoggets,
then the oldest of the younger lambs and lastly the very young ones80
all kept apart from one another; as for his dairy, all the vessels,
bowls, and milk pails into which he milked, were swimming with whey.
When they saw all this, my men begged me to let them first steal some
cheeses, and make off with them to the ship; they would then return,
drive down the lambs and kids, put them on board and sail away with
them. It would have been indeed better if we had done so but I would
not listen to them, for I wanted to see the owner himself, in the hope
that he might give me a present. When, however, we saw him my poor men
found him ill to deal with.

“We lit a fire, offered some of the cheeses in sacrifice, ate others of
them, and then sat waiting till the Cyclops should come in with his
sheep. When he came, he brought in with him a huge load of dry firewood
to light the fire for his supper, and this he flung with such a noise
on to the floor of his cave that we hid ourselves for fear at the far
end of the cavern. Meanwhile he drove all the ewes inside, as well as
the she-goats that he was going to milk, leaving the males, both rams
and he-goats, outside in the yards. Then he rolled a huge stone to the
mouth of the cave—so huge that two and twenty strong four-wheeled
waggons would not be enough to draw it from its place against the
doorway. When he had so done he sat down and milked his ewes and goats,
all in due course, and then let each of them have her own young. He
curdled half the milk and set it aside in wicker strainers, but the
other half he poured into bowls that he might drink it for his supper.
When he had got through with all his work, he lit the fire, and then
caught sight of us, whereon he said:

“‘Strangers, who are you? Where do sail from? Are you traders, or do
you sail the sea as rovers, with your hands against every man, and
every man’s hand against you?’

“We were frightened out of our senses by his loud voice and monstrous
form, but I managed to say, ‘We are Achaeans on our way home from Troy,
but by the will of Jove, and stress of weather, we have been driven far
out of our course. We are the people of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, who
has won infinite renown throughout the whole world, by sacking so great
a city and killing so many people. We therefore humbly pray you to show
us some hospitality, and otherwise make us such presents as visitors
may reasonably expect. May your excellency fear the wrath of heaven,
for we are your suppliants, and Jove takes all respectable travellers
under his protection, for he is the avenger of all suppliants and
foreigners in distress.’

“To this he gave me but a pitiless answer, ‘Stranger,’ said he, ‘you
are a fool, or else you know nothing of this country. Talk to me,
indeed, about fearing the gods or shunning their anger? We Cyclopes do
not care about Jove or any of your blessed gods, for we are ever so
much stronger than they. I shall not spare either yourself or your
companions out of any regard for Jove, unless I am in the humour for
doing so. And now tell me where you made your ship fast when you came
on shore. Was it round the point, or is she lying straight off the
land?’

“He said this to draw me out, but I was too cunning to be caught in
that way, so I answered with a lie; ‘Neptune,’ said I, ‘sent my ship on
to the rocks at the far end of your country, and wrecked it. We were
driven on to them from the open sea, but I and those who are with me
escaped the jaws of death.’

“The cruel wretch vouchsafed me not one word of answer, but with a
sudden clutch he gripped up two of my men at once and dashed them down
upon the ground as though they had been puppies. Their brains were shed
upon the ground, and the earth was wet with their blood. Then he tore
them limb from limb and supped upon them. He gobbled them up like a
lion in the wilderness, flesh, bones, marrow, and entrails, without
leaving anything uneaten. As for us, we wept and lifted up our hands to
heaven on seeing such a horrid sight, for we did not know what else to
do; but when the Cyclops had filled his huge paunch, and had washed
down his meal of human flesh with a drink of neat milk, he stretched
himself full length upon the ground among his sheep, and went to sleep.
I was at first inclined to seize my sword, draw it, and drive it into
his vitals, but I reflected that if I did we should all certainly be
lost, for we should never be able to shift the stone which the monster
had put in front of the door. So we stayed sobbing and sighing where we
were till morning came.

“When the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, he again lit
his fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly, and then let
each have her own young one; as soon as he had got through with all his
work, he clutched up two more of my men, and began eating them for his
morning’s meal. Presently, with the utmost ease, he rolled the stone
away from the door and drove out his sheep, but he at once put it back
again—as easily as though he were merely clapping the lid on to a
quiver full of arrows. As soon as he had done so he shouted, and cried
‘Shoo, shoo,’ after his sheep to drive them on to the mountain; so I
was left to scheme some way of taking my revenge and covering myself
with glory.

“In the end I deemed it would be the best plan to do as follows: The
Cyclops had a great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens; it
was of green olive wood, and he had cut it intending to use it for a
staff as soon as it should be dry. It was so huge that we could only
compare it to the mast of a twenty-oared merchant vessel of large
burden, and able to venture out into open sea. I went up to this club
and cut off about six feet of it; I then gave this piece to the men and
told them to fine it evenly off at one end, which they proceeded to do,
and lastly I brought it to a point myself, charring the end in the fire
to make it harder. When I had done this I hid it under dung, which was
lying about all over the cave, and told the men to cast lots which of
them should venture along with myself to lift it and bore it into the
monster’s eye while he was asleep. The lot fell upon the very four whom
I should have chosen, and I myself made five. In the evening the wretch
came back from shepherding, and drove his flocks into the cave—this
time driving them all inside, and not leaving any in the yards; I
suppose some fancy must have taken him, or a god must have prompted him
to do so. As soon as he had put the stone back to its place against the
door, he sat down, milked his ewes and his goats all quite rightly, and
then let each have her own young one; when he had got through with all
this work, he gripped up two more of my men, and made his supper off
them. So I went up to him with an ivy-wood bowl of black wine in my
hands:

“‘Look here, Cyclops,’ said I, you have been eating a great deal of
man’s flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may see what
kind of liquor we had on board my ship. I was bringing it to you as a
drink-offering, in the hope that you would take compassion upon me and
further me on my way home, whereas all you do is to go on ramping and
raving most intolerably. You ought to be ashamed of yourself; how can
you expect people to come see you any more if you treat them in this
way?’

“He then took the cup and drank. He was so delighted with the taste of
the wine that he begged me for another bowl full. ‘Be so kind,’ he
said, ‘as to give me some more, and tell me your name at once. I want
to make you a present that you will be glad to have. We have wine even
in this country, for our soil grows grapes and the sun ripens them, but
this drinks like Nectar and Ambrosia all in one.’

“I then gave him some more; three times did I fill the bowl for him,
and three times did he drain it without thought or heed; then, when I
saw that the wine had got into his head, I said to him as plausibly as
I could: ‘Cyclops, you ask my name and I will tell it you; give me,
therefore, the present you promised me; my name is Noman; this is what
my father and mother and my friends have always called me.’

“But the cruel wretch said, ‘Then I will eat all Noman’s comrades
before Noman himself, and will keep Noman for the last. This is the
present that I will make him.’

“As he spoke he reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground.
His great neck hung heavily backwards and a deep sleep took hold upon
him. Presently he turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbets
of human flesh on which he had been gorging, for he was very drunk.
Then I thrust the beam of wood far into the embers to heat it, and
encouraged my men lest any of them should turn faint-hearted. When the
wood, green though it was, was about to blaze, I drew it out of the
fire glowing with heat, and my men gathered round me, for heaven had
filled their hearts with courage. We drove the sharp end of the beam
into the monster’s eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight I kept
turning it round and round as though I were boring a hole in a ship’s
plank with an auger, which two men with a wheel and strap can keep on
turning as long as they choose. Even thus did we bore the red hot beam
into his eye, till the boiling blood bubbled all over it as we worked
it round and round, so that the steam from the burning eyeball scalded
his eyelids and eyebrows, and the roots of the eye sputtered in the
fire. As a blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet into cold water to
temper it—for it is this that gives strength to the iron—and it makes a
great hiss as he does so, even thus did the Cyclops’ eye hiss round the
beam of olive wood, and his hideous yells made the cave ring again. We
ran away in a fright, but he plucked the beam all besmirched with gore
from his eye, and hurled it from him in a frenzy of rage and pain,
shouting as he did so to the other Cyclopes who lived on the bleak
headlands near him; so they gathered from all quarters round his cave
when they heard him crying, and asked what was the matter with him.

“‘What ails you, Polyphemus,’ said they, ‘that you make such a noise,
breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us from being able
to sleep? Surely no man is carrying off your sheep? Surely no man is
trying to kill you either by fraud or by force?’

“But Polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, ‘Noman is killing
me by fraud; no man is killing me by force.’

“‘Then,’ said they, ‘if no man is attacking you, you must be ill; when
Jove makes people ill, there is no help for it, and you had better pray
to your father Neptune.’

“Then they went away, and I laughed inwardly at the success of my
clever stratagem, but the Cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain,
felt about with his hands till he found the stone and took it from the
door; then he sat in the doorway and stretched his hands in front of it
to catch anyone going out with the sheep, for he thought I might be
foolish enough to attempt this.

“As for myself I kept on puzzling to think how I could best save my own
life and those of my companions; I schemed and schemed, as one who
knows that his life depends upon it, for the danger was very great. In
the end I deemed that this plan would be the best; the male sheep were
well grown, and carried a heavy black fleece, so I bound them
noiselessly in threes together, with some of the withies on which the
wicked monster used to sleep. There was to be a man under the middle
sheep, and the two on either side were to cover him, so that there were
three sheep to each man. As for myself there was a ram finer than any
of the others, so I caught hold of him by the back, esconced myself in
the thick wool under his belly, and hung on patiently to his fleece,
face upwards, keeping a firm hold on it all the time.

“Thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came, but
when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the male sheep
hurried out to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about the pens
waiting to be milked, for their udders were full to bursting; but their
master in spite of all his pain felt the backs of all the sheep as they
stood upright, without being sharp enough to find out that the men were
underneath their bellies. As the ram was going out, last of all, heavy
with its fleece and with the weight of my crafty self, Polyphemus laid
hold of it and said:

“‘My good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cave this
morning? You are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but lead the
mob with a run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain, and are
the first to come home again at night; but now you lag last of all. Is
it because you know your master has lost his eye, and are sorry because
that wicked Noman and his horrid crew has got him down in his drink and
blinded him? But I will have his life yet. If you could understand and
talk, you would tell me where the wretch is hiding, and I would dash
his brains upon the ground till they flew all over the cave. I should
thus have some satisfaction for the harm this no-good Noman has done
me.’

“As he spoke he drove the ram outside, but when we were a little way
out from the cave and yards, I first got from under the ram’s belly,
and then freed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat, by
constantly heading them in the right direction we managed to drive them
down to the ship. The crew rejoiced greatly at seeing those of us who
had escaped death, but wept for the others whom the Cyclops had killed.
However, I made signs to them by nodding and frowning that they were to
hush their crying, and told them to get all the sheep on board at once
and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took their places, and smote
the grey sea with their oars. Then, when I had got as far out as my
voice would reach, I began to jeer at the Cyclops.

“‘Cyclops,’ said I, ‘you should have taken better measure of your man
before eating up his comrades in your cave. You wretch, eat up your
visitors in your own house? You might have known that your sin would
find you out, and now Jove and the other gods have punished you.’

“He got more and more furious as he heard me, so he tore the top from
off a high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that it
was within a little of hitting the end of the rudder.81 The sea quaked
as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised carried us
back towards the mainland, and forced us towards the shore. But I
snatched up a long pole and kept the ship off, making signs to my men
by nodding my head, that they must row for their lives, whereon they
laid out with a will. When we had got twice as far as we were before, I
was for jeering at the Cyclops again, but the men begged and prayed of
me to hold my tongue.

“‘Do not,’ they exclaimed, ‘be mad enough to provoke this savage
creature further; he has thrown one rock at us already which drove us
back again to the mainland, and we made sure it had been the death of
us; if he had then heard any further sound of voices he would have
pounded our heads and our ship’s timbers into a jelly with the rugged
rocks he would have heaved at us, for he can throw them a long way.’

“But I would not listen to them, and shouted out to him in my rage,
‘Cyclops, if any one asks you who it was that put your eye out and
spoiled your beauty, say it was the valiant warrior Ulysses, son of
Laertes, who lives in Ithaca.’

“On this he groaned, and cried out, ‘Alas, alas, then the old prophecy
about me is coming true. There was a prophet here, at one time, a man
both brave and of great stature, Telemus son of Eurymus, who was an
excellent seer, and did all the prophesying for the Cyclopes till he
grew old; he told me that all this would happen to me some day, and
said I should lose my sight by the hand of Ulysses. I have been all
along expecting some one of imposing presence and superhuman strength,
whereas he turns out to be a little insignificant weakling, who has
managed to blind my eye by taking advantage of me in my drink; come
here, then, Ulysses, that I may make you presents to show my
hospitality, and urge Neptune to help you forward on your journey—for
Neptune and I are father and son. He, if he so will, shall heal me,
which no one else neither god nor man can do.’

“Then I said, ‘I wish I could be as sure of killing you outright and
sending you down to the house of Hades, as I am that it will take more
than Neptune to cure that eye of yours.’

“On this he lifted up his hands to the firmament of heaven and prayed,
saying, ‘Hear me, great Neptune; if I am indeed your own true begotten
son, grant that Ulysses may never reach his home alive; or if he must
get back to his friends at last, let him do so late and in sore plight
after losing all his men [let him reach his home in another man’s ship
and find trouble in his house.’82

“Thus did he pray, and Neptune heard his prayer. Then he picked up a
rock much larger than the first, swung it aloft and hurled it with
prodigious force. It fell just short of the ship, but was within a
little of hitting the end of the rudder. The sea quaked as the rock
fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised drove us onwards on
our way towards the shore of the island.

“When at last we got to the island where we had left the rest of our
ships, we found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously awaiting our
return. We ran our vessel upon the sands and got out of her on to the
sea shore; we also landed the Cyclops’ sheep, and divided them
equitably amongst us so that none might have reason to complain. As for
the ram, my companions agreed that I should have it as an extra share;
so I sacrificed it on the sea shore, and burned its thigh bones to
Jove, who is the lord of all. But he heeded not my sacrifice, and only
thought how he might destroy both my ships and my comrades.

“Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted
our fill on meat and drink, but when the sun went down and it came on
dark, we camped upon the beach. When the child of morning rosy-fingered
Dawn appeared, I bade my men on board and loose the hawsers. Then they
took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars; so we sailed
on with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death though we
had lost our comrades.




BOOK X


AEOLUS, THE LAESTRYGONES, CIRCE.


“Thence we went on to the Aeolian island where lives Aeolus son of
Hippotas, dear to the immortal gods. It is an island that floats (as it
were) upon the sea,83 iron bound with a wall that girds it. Now, Aeolus
has six daughters and six lusty sons, so he made the sons marry the
daughters, and they all live with their dear father and mother,
feasting and enjoying every conceivable kind of luxury. All day long
the atmosphere of the house is loaded with the savour of roasting meats
till it groans again, yard and all; but by night they sleep on their
well made bedsteads, each with his own wife between the blankets. These
were the people among whom we had now come.

“Aeolus entertained me for a whole month asking me questions all the
time about Troy, the Argive fleet, and the return of the Achaeans. I
told him exactly how everything had happened, and when I said I must
go, and asked him to further me on my way, he made no sort of
difficulty, but set about doing so at once. Moreover, he flayed me a
prime ox-hide to hold the ways of the roaring winds, which he shut up
in the hide as in a sack—for Jove had made him captain over the winds,
and he could stir or still each one of them according to his own
pleasure. He put the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightly
with a silver thread that not even a breath of a side-wind could blow
from any quarter. The West wind which was fair for us did he alone let
blow as it chose; but it all came to nothing, for we were lost through
our own folly.

“Nine days and nine nights did we sail, and on the tenth day our native
land showed on the horizon. We got so close in that we could see the
stubble fires burning, and I, being then dead beat, fell into a light
sleep, for I had never let the rudder out of my own hands, that we
might get home the faster. On this the men fell to talking among
themselves, and said I was bringing back gold and silver in the sack
that Aeolus had given me. ‘Bless my heart,’ would one turn to his
neighbour, saying, ‘how this man gets honoured and makes friends to
whatever city or country he may go. See what fine prizes he is taking
home from Troy, while we, who have travelled just as far as he has,
come back with hands as empty as we set out with—and now Aeolus has
given him ever so much more. Quick—let us see what it all is, and how
much gold and silver there is in the sack he gave him.’

“Thus they talked and evil counsels prevailed. They loosed the sack,
whereupon the wind flew howling forth and raised a storm that carried
us weeping out to sea and away from our own country. Then I awoke, and
knew not whether to throw myself into the sea or to live on and make
the best of it; but I bore it, covered myself up, and lay down in the
ship, while the men lamented bitterly as the fierce winds bore our
fleet back to the Aeolian island.

“When we reached it we went ashore to take in water, and dined hard by
the ships. Immediately after dinner I took a herald and one of my men
and went straight to the house of Aeolus, where I found him feasting
with his wife and family; so we sat down as suppliants on the
threshold. They were astounded when they saw us and said, ‘Ulysses,
what brings you here? What god has been ill-treating you? We took great
pains to further you on your way home to Ithaca, or wherever it was
that you wanted to go to.’

“Thus did they speak, but I answered sorrowfully, ‘My men have undone
me; they, and cruel sleep, have ruined me. My friends, mend me this
mischief, for you can if you will.’

“I spoke as movingly as I could, but they said nothing, till their
father answered, ‘Vilest of mankind, get you gone at once out of the
island; him whom heaven hates will I in no wise help. Be off, for you
come here as one abhorred of heaven.’ And with these words he sent me
sorrowing from his door.

“Thence we sailed sadly on till the men were worn out with long and
fruitless rowing, for there was no longer any wind to help them. Six
days, night and day did we toil, and on the seventh day we reached the
rocky stronghold of Lamus—Telepylus, the city of the Laestrygonians,
where the shepherd who is driving in his sheep and goats [to be milked]
salutes him who is driving out his flock [to feed] and this last
answers the salute. In that country a man who could do without sleep
might earn double wages, one as a herdsman of cattle, and another as a
shepherd, for they work much the same by night as they do by day.84

“When we reached the harbour we found it land-locked under steep
cliffs, with a narrow entrance between two headlands. My captains took
all their ships inside, and made them fast close to one another, for
there was never so much as a breath of wind inside, but it was always
dead calm. I kept my own ship outside, and moored it to a rock at the
very end of the point; then I climbed a high rock to reconnoitre, but
could see no sign neither of man nor cattle, only some smoke rising
from the ground. So I sent two of my company with an attendant to find
out what sort of people the inhabitants were.

“The men when they got on shore followed a level road by which the
people draw their firewood from the mountains into the town, till
presently they met a young woman who had come outside to fetch water,
and who was daughter to a Laestrygonian named Antiphates. She was going
to the fountain Artacia from which the people bring in their water, and
when my men had come close up to her, they asked her who the king of
that country might be, and over what kind of people he ruled; so she
directed them to her father’s house, but when they got there they found
his wife to be a giantess as huge as a mountain, and they were
horrified at the sight of her.

“She at once called her husband Antiphates from the place of assembly,
and forthwith he set about killing my men. He snatched up one of them,
and began to make his dinner off him then and there, whereon the other
two ran back to the ships as fast as ever they could. But Antiphates
raised a hue-and-cry after them, and thousands of sturdy Laestrygonians
sprang up from every quarter—ogres, not men. They threw vast rocks at
us from the cliffs as though they had been mere stones, and I heard the
horrid sound of the ships crunching up against one another, and the
death cries of my men, as the Laestrygonians speared them like fishes
and took them home to eat them. While they were thus killing my men
within the harbour I drew my sword, cut the cable of my own ship, and
told my men to row with all their might if they too would not fare like
the rest; so they laid out for their lives, and we were thankful enough
when we got into open water out of reach of the rocks they hurled at
us. As for the others there was not one of them left.

“Thence we sailed sadly on, glad to have escaped death, though we had
lost our comrades, and came to the Aeaean island, where Circe lives—a
great and cunning goddess who is own sister to the magician Aeetes—for
they are both children of the sun by Perse, who is daughter to Oceanus.
We brought our ship into a safe harbour without a word, for some god
guided us thither, and having landed we lay there for two days and two
nights, worn out in body and mind. When the morning of the third day
came I took my spear and my sword, and went away from the ship to
reconnoitre, and see if I could discover signs of human handiwork, or
hear the sound of voices. Climbing to the top of a high look-out I
espied the smoke of Circe’s house rising upwards amid a dense forest of
trees, and when I saw this I doubted whether, having seen the smoke, I
would not go on at once and find out more, but in the end I deemed it
best to go back to the ship, give the men their dinners, and send some
of them instead of going myself.

“When I had nearly got back to the ship some god took pity upon my
solitude, and sent a fine antlered stag right into the middle of my
path. He was coming down his pasture in the forest to drink of the
river, for the heat of the sun drove him, and as he passed I struck him
in the middle of the back; the bronze point of the spear went clean
through him, and he lay groaning in the dust until the life went out of
him. Then I set my foot upon him, drew my spear from the wound, and
laid it down; I also gathered rough grass and rushes and twisted them
into a fathom or so of good stout rope, with which I bound the four
feet of the noble creature together; having so done I hung him round my
neck and walked back to the ship leaning upon my spear, for the stag
was much too big for me to be able to carry him on my shoulder,
steadying him with one hand. As I threw him down in front of the ship,
I called the men and spoke cheeringly man by man to each of them. ‘Look
here my friends,’ said I, ‘we are not going to die so much before our
time after all, and at any rate we will not starve so long as we have
got something to eat and drink on board.’ On this they uncovered their
heads upon the sea shore and admired the stag, for he was indeed a
splendid fellow. Then, when they had feasted their eyes upon him
sufficiently, they washed their hands and began to cook him for dinner.

“Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we stayed
there eating and drinking our fill, but when the sun went down and it
came on dark, we camped upon the sea shore. When the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I called a council and said, ‘My friends,
we are in very great difficulties; listen therefore to me. We have no
idea where the sun either sets or rises,85 so that we do not even know
East from West. I see no way out of it; nevertheless, we must try and
find one. We are certainly on an island, for I went as high as I could
this morning, and saw the sea reaching all round it to the horizon; it
lies low, but towards the middle I saw smoke rising from out of a thick
forest of trees.’

“Their hearts sank as they heard me, for they remembered how they had
been treated by the Laestrygonian Antiphates, and by the savage ogre
Polyphemus. They wept bitterly in their dismay, but there was nothing
to be got by crying, so I divided them into two companies and set a
captain over each; I gave one company to Eurylochus, while I took
command of the other myself. Then we cast lots in a helmet, and the lot
fell upon Eurylochus; so he set out with his twenty-two men, and they
wept, as also did we who were left behind.

“When they reached Circe’s house they found it built of cut stones, on
a site that could be seen from far, in the middle of the forest. There
were wild mountain wolves and lions prowling all round it—poor
bewitched creatures whom she had tamed by her enchantments and drugged
into subjection. They did not attack my men, but wagged their great
tails, fawned upon them, and rubbed their noses lovingly against
them.86 As hounds crowd round their master when they see him coming
from dinner—for they know he will bring them something—even so did
these wolves and lions with their great claws fawn upon my men, but the
men were terribly frightened at seeing such strange creatures.
Presently they reached the gates of the goddess’s house, and as they
stood there they could hear Circe within, singing most beautifully as
she worked at her loom, making a web so fine, so soft, and of such
dazzling colours as no one but a goddess could weave. On this Polites,
whom I valued and trusted more than any other of my men, said, ‘There
is some one inside working at a loom and singing most beautifully; the
whole place resounds with it, let us call her and see whether she is
woman or goddess.’

“They called her and she came down, unfastened the door, and bade them
enter. They, thinking no evil, followed her, all except Eurylochus, who
suspected mischief and staid outside. When she had got them into her
house, she set them upon benches and seats and mixed them a mess with
cheese, honey, meal, and Pramnian wine, but she drugged it with wicked
poisons to make them forget their homes, and when they had drunk she
turned them into pigs by a stroke of her wand, and shut them up in her
pig-styes. They were like pigs—head, hair, and all, and they grunted
just as pigs do; but their senses were the same as before, and they
remembered everything.

“Thus then were they shut up squealing, and Circe threw them some
acorns and beech masts such as pigs eat, but Eurylochus hurried back to
tell me about the sad fate of our comrades. He was so overcome with
dismay that though he tried to speak he could find no words to do so;
his eyes filled with tears and he could only sob and sigh, till at last
we forced his story out of him, and he told us what had happened to the
others.

“‘We went,’ said he, ‘as you told us, through the forest, and in the
middle of it there was a fine house built with cut stones in a place
that could be seen from far. There we found a woman, or else she was a
goddess, working at her loom and singing sweetly; so the men shouted to
her and called her, whereon she at once came down, opened the door, and
invited us in. The others did not suspect any mischief so they followed
her into the house, but I staid where I was, for I thought there might
be some treachery. From that moment I saw them no more, for not one of
them ever came out, though I sat a long time watching for them.’

“Then I took my sword of bronze and slung it over my shoulders; I also
took my bow, and told Eurylochus to come back with me and shew me the
way. But he laid hold of me with both his hands and spoke piteously,
saying, ‘Sir, do not force me to go with you, but let me stay here, for
I know you will not bring one of them back with you, nor even return
alive yourself; let us rather see if we cannot escape at any rate with
the few that are left us, for we may still save our lives.’

“‘Stay where you are, then,’ answered I, ‘eating and drinking at the
ship, but I must go, for I am most urgently bound to do so.’

“With this I left the ship and went up inland. When I got through the
charmed grove, and was near the great house of the enchantress Circe, I
met Mercury with his golden wand, disguised as a young man in the
hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his
face. He came up to me and took my hand within his own, saying, ‘My
poor unhappy man, whither are you going over this mountain top, alone
and without knowing the way? Your men are shut up in Circe’s pigstyes,
like so many wild boars in their lairs. You surely do not fancy that
you can set them free? I can tell you that you will never get back and
will have to stay there with the rest of them. But never mind, I will
protect you and get you out of your difficulty. Take this herb, which
is one of great virtue, and keep it about you when you go to Circe’s
house, it will be a talisman to you against every kind of mischief.

“‘And I will tell you of all the wicked witchcraft that Circe will try
to practice upon you. She will mix a mess for you to drink, and she
will drug the meal with which she makes it, but she will not be able to
charm you, for the virtue of the herb that I shall give you will
prevent her spells from working. I will tell you all about it. When
Circe strikes you with her wand, draw your sword and spring upon her as
though you were going to kill her. She will then be frightened, and
will desire you to go to bed with her; on this you must not point blank
refuse her, for you want her to set your companions free, and to take
good care also of yourself, but you must make her swear solemnly by all
the blessed gods that she will plot no further mischief against you, or
else when she has got you naked she will unman you and make you fit for
nothing.’

“As he spoke he pulled the herb out of the ground and shewed me what it
was like. The root was black, while the flower was as white as milk;
the gods call it Moly, and mortal men cannot uproot it, but the gods
can do whatever they like.

“Then Mercury went back to high Olympus passing over the wooded island;
but I fared onward to the house of Circe, and my heart was clouded with
care as I walked along. When I got to the gates I stood there and
called the goddess, and as soon as she heard me she came down, opened
the door, and asked me to come in; so I followed her—much troubled in
my mind. She set me on a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver,
there was a footstool also under my feet, and she mixed a mess in a
golden goblet for me to drink; but she drugged it, for she meant me
mischief. When she had given it me, and I had drunk it without its
charming me, she struck me with her wand. ‘There now,’ she cried, ‘be
off to the pigstye, and make your lair with the rest of them.’

“But I rushed at her with my sword drawn as though I would kill her,
whereon she fell with a loud scream, clasped my knees, and spoke
piteously, saying, ‘Who and whence are you? from what place and people
have you come? How can it be that my drugs have no power to charm you?
Never yet was any man able to stand so much as a taste of the herb I
gave you; you must be spell-proof; surely you can be none other than
the bold hero Ulysses, who Mercury always said would come here some day
with his ship while on his way home from Troy; so be it then; sheathe
your sword and let us go to bed, that we may make friends and learn to
trust each other.’

“And I answered, ‘Circe, how can you expect me to be friendly with you
when you have just been turning all my men into pigs? And now that you
have got me here myself, you mean me mischief when you ask me to go to
bed with you, and will unman me and make me fit for nothing. I shall
certainly not consent to go to bed with you unless you will first take
your solemn oath to plot no further harm against me.’

“So she swore at once as I had told her, and when she had completed her
oath then I went to bed with her.

“Meanwhile her four servants, who are her housemaids, set about their
work. They are the children of the groves and fountains, and of the
holy waters that run down into the sea. One of them spread a fair
purple cloth over a seat, and laid a carpet underneath it. Another
brought tables of silver up to the seats, and set them with baskets of
gold. A third mixed some sweet wine with water in a silver bowl and put
golden cups upon the tables, while the fourth brought in water and set
it to boil in a large cauldron over a good fire which she had lighted.
When the water in the cauldron was boiling,87 she poured cold into it
till it was just as I liked it, and then she set me in a bath and began
washing me from the cauldron about the head and shoulders, to take the
tire and stiffness out of my limbs. As soon as she had done washing me
and anointing me with oil, she arrayed me in a good cloak and shirt and
led me to a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a
footstool also under my feet. A maid servant then brought me water in a
beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for me to wash
my hands, and she drew a clean table beside me; an upper servant
brought me bread and offered me many things of what there was in the
house, and then Circe bade me eat, but I would not, and sat without
heeding what was before me, still moody and suspicious.

“When Circe saw me sitting there without eating, and in great grief,
she came to me and said, ‘Ulysses, why do you sit like that as though
you were dumb, gnawing at your own heart, and refusing both meat and
drink? Is it that you are still suspicious? You ought not to be, for I
have already sworn solemnly that I will not hurt you.’

“And I said, ‘Circe, no man with any sense of what is right can think
of either eating or drinking in your house until you have set his
friends free and let him see them. If you want me to eat and drink, you
must free my men and bring them to me that I may see them with my own
eyes.’

“When I had said this she went straight through the court with her wand
in her hand and opened the pigstye doors. My men came out like so many
prime hogs and stood looking at her, but she went about among them and
anointed each with a second drug, whereon the bristles that the bad
drug had given them fell off, and they became men again, younger than
they were before, and much taller and better looking. They knew me at
once, seized me each of them by the hand, and wept for joy till the
whole house was filled with the sound of their halloa-ballooing, and
Circe herself was so sorry for them that she came up to me and said,
‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, go back at once to the sea where you
have left your ship, and first draw it on to the land. Then, hide all
your ship’s gear and property in some cave, and come back here with
your men.’

“I agreed to this, so I went back to the sea shore, and found the men
at the ship weeping and wailing most piteously. When they saw me the
silly blubbering fellows began frisking round me as calves break out
and gambol round their mothers, when they see them coming home to be
milked after they have been feeding all day, and the homestead resounds
with their lowing. They seemed as glad to see me as though they had got
back to their own rugged Ithaca, where they had been born and bred.
‘Sir,’ said the affectionate creatures, ‘we are as glad to see you back
as though we had got safe home to Ithaca; but tell us all about the
fate of our comrades.’

“I spoke comfortingly to them and said, ‘We must draw our ship on to
the land, and hide the ship’s gear with all our property in some cave;
then come with me all of you as fast as you can to Circe’s house, where
you will find your comrades eating and drinking in the midst of great
abundance.’

“On this the men would have come with me at once, but Eurylochus tried
to hold them back and said, ‘Alas, poor wretches that we are, what will
become of us? Rush not on your ruin by going to the house of Circe, who
will turn us all into pigs or wolves or lions, and we shall have to
keep guard over her house. Remember how the Cyclops treated us when our
comrades went inside his cave, and Ulysses with them. It was all
through his sheer folly that those men lost their lives.’

“When I heard him I was in two minds whether or no to draw the keen
blade that hung by my sturdy thigh and cut his head off in spite of his
being a near relation of my own; but the men interceded for him and
said, ‘Sir, if it may so be, let this fellow stay here and mind the
ship, but take the rest of us with you to Circe’s house.’

“On this we all went inland, and Eurylochus was not left behind after
all, but came on too, for he was frightened by the severe reprimand
that I had given him.

“Meanwhile Circe had been seeing that the men who had been left behind
were washed and anointed with olive oil; she had also given them
woollen cloaks and shirts, and when we came we found them all
comfortably at dinner in her house. As soon as the men saw each other
face to face and knew one another, they wept for joy and cried aloud
till the whole palace rang again. Thereon Circe came up to me and said,
‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, tell your men to leave off crying; I
know how much you have all of you suffered at sea, and how ill you have
fared among cruel savages on the mainland, but that is over now, so
stay here, and eat and drink till you are once more as strong and
hearty as you were when you left Ithaca; for at present you are
weakened both in body and mind; you keep all the time thinking of the
hardships you have suffered during your travels, so that you have no
more cheerfulness left in you.’

“Thus did she speak and we assented. We stayed with Circe for a whole
twelvemonth feasting upon an untold quantity both of meat and wine. But
when the year had passed in the waning of moons and the long days had
come round, my men called me apart and said, ‘Sir, it is time you began
to think about going home, if so be you are to be spared to see your
house and native country at all.’

“Thus did they speak and I assented. Thereon through the livelong day
to the going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and wine, but
when the sun went down and it came on dark the men laid themselves down
to sleep in the covered cloisters. I, however, after I had got into bed
with Circe, besought her by her knees, and the goddess listened to what
I had got to say. ‘Circe,’ said I, ‘please to keep the promise you made
me about furthering me on my homeward voyage. I want to get back and so
do my men, they are always pestering me with their complaints as soon
as ever your back is turned.’

“And the goddess answered, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, you shall
none of you stay here any longer if you do not want to, but there is
another journey which you have got to take before you can sail
homewards. You must go to the house of Hades and of dread Proserpine to
consult the ghost of the blind Theban prophet Teiresias, whose reason
is still unshaken. To him alone has Proserpine left his understanding
even in death, but the other ghosts flit about aimlessly.’

“I was dismayed when I heard this. I sat up in bed and wept, and would
gladly have lived no longer to see the light of the sun, but presently
when I was tired of weeping and tossing myself about, I said, ‘And who
shall guide me upon this voyage—for the house of Hades is a port that
no ship can reach.’

“‘You will want no guide,’ she answered; ‘raise your mast, set your
white sails, sit quite still, and the North Wind will blow you there of
itself. When your ship has traversed the waters of Oceanus, you will
reach the fertile shore of Proserpine’s country with its groves of tall
poplars and willows that shed their fruit untimely; here beach your
ship upon the shore of Oceanus, and go straight on to the dark abode of
Hades. You will find it near the place where the rivers Pyriphlegethon
and Cocytus (which is a branch of the river Styx) flow into Acheron,
and you will see a rock near it, just where the two roaring rivers run
into one another.

“‘When you have reached this spot, as I now tell you, dig a trench a
cubit or so in length, breadth, and depth, and pour into it as a
drink-offering to all the dead, first, honey mixed with milk, then
wine, and in the third place water—sprinkling white barley meal over
the whole. Moreover you must offer many prayers to the poor feeble
ghosts, and promise them that when you get back to Ithaca you will
sacrifice a barren heifer to them, the best you have, and will load the
pyre with good things. More particularly you must promise that
Teiresias shall have a black sheep all to himself, the finest in all
your flocks.

“‘When you shall have thus besought the ghosts with your prayers, offer
them a ram and a black ewe, bending their heads towards Erebus; but
yourself turn away from them as though you would make towards the
river. On this, many dead men’s ghosts will come to you, and you must
tell your men to skin the two sheep that you have just killed, and
offer them as a burnt sacrifice with prayers to Hades and to
Proserpine. Then draw your sword and sit there, so as to prevent any
other poor ghost from coming near the spilt blood before Teiresias
shall have answered your questions. The seer will presently come to
you, and will tell you about your voyage—what stages you are to make,
and how you are to sail the sea so as to reach your home.’

“It was day-break by the time she had done speaking, so she dressed me
in my shirt and cloak. As for herself she threw a beautiful light
gossamer fabric over her shoulders, fastening it with a golden girdle
round her waist, and she covered her head with a mantle. Then I went
about among the men everywhere all over the house, and spoke kindly to
each of them man by man: ‘You must not lie sleeping here any longer,’
said I to them, ‘we must be going, for Circe has told me all about it.’
And on this they did as I bade them.

“Even so, however, I did not get them away without misadventure. We had
with us a certain youth named Elpenor, not very remarkable for sense or
courage, who had got drunk and was lying on the house-top away from the
rest of the men, to sleep off his liquor in the cool. When he heard the
noise of the men bustling about, he jumped up on a sudden and forgot
all about coming down by the main staircase, so he tumbled right off
the roof and broke his neck, and his soul went down to the house of
Hades.

“When I had got the men together I said to them, ‘You think you are
about to start home again, but Circe has explained to me that instead
of this, we have got to go to the house of Hades and Proserpine to
consult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias.’

“The men were broken-hearted as they heard me, and threw themselves on
the ground groaning and tearing their hair, but they did not mend
matters by crying. When we reached the sea shore, weeping and lamenting
our fate, Circe brought the ram and the ewe, and we made them fast hard
by the ship. She passed through the midst of us without our knowing it,
for who can see the comings and goings of a god, if the god does not
wish to be seen?




BOOK XI


THE VISIT TO THE DEAD.88


“Then, when we had got down to the sea shore we drew our ship into the
water and got her mast and sails into her; we also put the sheep on
board and took our places, weeping and in great distress of mind.
Circe, that great and cunning goddess, sent us a fair wind that blew
dead aft and staid steadily with us keeping our sails all the time well
filled; so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear and let her
go as the wind and helmsman headed her. All day long her sails were
full as she held her course over the sea, but when the sun went down
and darkness was over all the earth, we got into the deep waters of the
river Oceanus, where lie the land and city of the Cimmerians who live
enshrouded in mist and darkness which the rays of the sun never pierce
neither at his rising nor as he goes down again out of the heavens, but
the poor wretches live in one long melancholy night. When we got there
we beached the ship, took the sheep out of her, and went along by the
waters of Oceanus till we came to the place of which Circe had told us.

“Here Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims, while I drew my sword
and dug the trench a cubit each way. I made a drink-offering to all the
dead, first with honey and milk, then with wine, and thirdly with
water, and I sprinkled white barley meal over the whole, praying
earnestly to the poor feckless ghosts, and promising them that when I
got back to Ithaca I would sacrifice a barren heifer for them, the best
I had, and would load the pyre with good things. I also particularly
promised that Teiresias should have a black sheep to himself, the best
in all my flocks. When I had prayed sufficiently to the dead, I cut the
throats of the two sheep and let the blood run into the trench, whereon
the ghosts came trooping up from Erebus—brides,89 young bachelors, old
men worn out with toil, maids who had been crossed in love, and brave
men who had been killed in battle, with their armour still smirched
with blood; they came from every quarter and flitted round the trench
with a strange kind of screaming sound that made me turn pale with
fear. When I saw them coming I told the men to be quick and flay the
carcasses of the two dead sheep and make burnt offerings of them, and
at the same time to repeat prayers to Hades and to Proserpine; but I
sat where I was with my sword drawn and would not let the poor feckless
ghosts come near the blood till Teiresias should have answered my
questions.

“The first ghost that came was that of my comrade Elpenor, for he had
not yet been laid beneath the earth. We had left his body unwaked and
unburied in Circe’s house, for we had had too much else to do. I was
very sorry for him, and cried when I saw him: ‘Elpenor,’ said I, ‘how
did you come down here into this gloom and darkness? You have got here
on foot quicker than I have with my ship.’

“‘Sir,’ he answered with a groan, ‘it was all bad luck, and my own
unspeakable drunkenness. I was lying asleep on the top of Circe’s
house, and never thought of coming down again by the great staircase
but fell right off the roof and broke my neck, so my soul came down to
the house of Hades. And now I beseech you by all those whom you have
left behind you, though they are not here, by your wife, by the father
who brought you up when you were a child, and by Telemachus who is the
one hope of your house, do what I shall now ask you. I know that when
you leave this limbo you will again hold your ship for the Aeaean
island. Do not go thence leaving me unwaked and unburied behind you, or
I may bring heaven’s anger upon you; but burn me with whatever armour I
have, build a barrow for me on the sea shore, that may tell people in
days to come what a poor unlucky fellow I was, and plant over my grave
the oar I used to row with when I was yet alive and with my messmates.’
And I said, ‘My poor fellow, I will do all that you have asked of me.’

“Thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, I on the
one side of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the ghost
of my comrade saying all this to me from the other side. Then came the
ghost of my dead mother Anticlea, daughter to Autolycus. I had left her
alive when I set out for Troy and was moved to tears when I saw her,
but even so, for all my sorrow I would not let her come near the blood
till I had asked my questions of Teiresias.

“Then came also the ghost of Theban Teiresias, with his golden sceptre
in his hand. He knew me and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, why,
poor man, have you left the light of day and come down to visit the
dead in this sad place? Stand back from the trench and withdraw your
sword that I may drink of the blood and answer your questions truly.’

“So I drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when he had drank of
the blood he began with his prophecy.

“‘You want to know,’ said he, ‘about your return home, but heaven will
make this hard for you. I do not think that you will escape the eye of
Neptune, who still nurses his bitter grudge against you for having
blinded his son. Still, after much suffering you may get home if you
can restrain yourself and your companions when your ship reaches the
Thrinacian island, where you will find the sheep and cattle belonging
to the sun, who sees and gives ear to everything. If you leave these
flocks unharmed and think of nothing but of getting home, you may yet
after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I forewarn
you of the destruction both of your ship and of your men. Even though
you may yourself escape, you will return in bad plight after losing all
your men, [in another man’s ship, and you will find trouble in your
house, which will be overrun by high-handed people, who are devouring
your substance under the pretext of paying court and making presents to
your wife.

“‘When you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors; and
after you have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, you
must take a well made oar and carry it on and on, till you come to a
country where the people have never heard of the sea and do not even
mix salt with their food, nor do they know anything about ships, and
oars that are as the wings of a ship. I will give you this certain
token which cannot escape your notice. A wayfarer will meet you and
will say it must be a winnowing shovel that you have got upon your
shoulder; on this you must fix the oar in the ground and sacrifice a
ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune.90 Then go home and offer hecatombs
to all the gods in heaven one after the other. As for yourself, death
shall come to you from the sea, and your life shall ebb away very
gently when you are full of years and peace of mind, and your people
shall bless you. All that I have said will come true].’91

“‘This,’ I answered, ‘must be as it may please heaven, but tell me and
tell me and tell me true, I see my poor mother’s ghost close by us; she
is sitting by the blood without saying a word, and though I am her own
son she does not remember me and speak to me; tell me, Sir, how I can
make her know me.’

“‘That,’ said he, ‘I can soon do. Any ghost that you let taste of the
blood will talk with you like a reasonable being, but if you do not let
them have any blood they will go away again.’

“On this the ghost of Teiresias went back to the house of Hades, for
his prophecyings had now been spoken, but I sat still where I was until
my mother came up and tasted the blood. Then she knew me at once and
spoke fondly to me, saying, ‘My son, how did you come down to this
abode of darkness while you are still alive? It is a hard thing for the
living to see these places, for between us and them there are great and
terrible waters, and there is Oceanus, which no man can cross on foot,
but he must have a good ship to take him. Are you all this time trying
to find your way home from Troy, and have you never yet got back to
Ithaca nor seen your wife in your own house?’

“‘Mother,’ said I, ‘I was forced to come here to consult the ghost of
the Theban prophet Teiresias. I have never yet been near the Achaean
land nor set foot on my native country, and I have had nothing but one
long series of misfortunes from the very first day that I set out with
Agamemnon for Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans.
But tell me, and tell me true, in what way did you die? Did you have a
long illness, or did heaven vouchsafe you a gentle easy passage to
eternity? Tell me also about my father, and the son whom I left behind
me, is my property still in their hands, or has some one else got hold
of it, who thinks that I shall not return to claim it? Tell me again
what my wife intends doing, and in what mind she is; does she live with
my son and guard my estate securely, or has she made the best match she
could and married again?’

“My mother answered, ‘Your wife still remains in your house, but she is
in great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both night
and day. No one as yet has got possession of your fine property, and
Telemachus still holds your lands undisturbed. He has to entertain
largely, as of course he must, considering his position as a
magistrate,92 and how every one invites him; your father remains at his
old place in the country and never goes near the town. He has no
comfortable bed nor bedding; in the winter he sleeps on the floor in
front of the fire with the men and goes about all in rags, but in
summer, when the warm weather comes on again, he lies out in the
vineyard on a bed of vine leaves thrown any how upon the ground. He
grieves continually about your never having come home, and suffers more
and more as he grows older. As for my own end it was in this wise:
heaven did not take me swiftly and painlessly in my own house, nor was
I attacked by any illness such as those that generally wear people out
and kill them, but my longing to know what you were doing and the force
of my affection for you—this it was that was the death of me.’93

“Then I tried to find some way of embracing my poor mother’s ghost.
Thrice I sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but each
time she flitted from my embrace as it were a dream or phantom, and
being touched to the quick I said to her, ‘Mother, why do you not stay
still when I would embrace you? If we could throw our arms around one
another we might find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows even in
the house of Hades; does Proserpine want to lay a still further load of
grief upon me by mocking me with a phantom only?’

“‘My son,’ she answered, ‘most ill-fated of all mankind, it is not
Proserpine that is beguiling you, but all people are like this when
they are dead. The sinews no longer hold the flesh and bones together;
these perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life has
left the body, and the soul flits away as though it were a dream. Now,
however, go back to the light of day as soon as you can, and note all
these things that you may tell them to your wife hereafter.’

“Thus did we converse, and anon Proserpine sent up the ghosts of the
wives and daughters of all the most famous men. They gathered in crowds
about the blood, and I considered how I might question them severally.
In the end I deemed that it would be best to draw the keen blade that
hung by my sturdy thigh, and keep them from all drinking the blood at
once. So they came up one after the other, and each one as I questioned
her told me her race and lineage.

“The first I saw was Tyro. She was daughter of Salmoneus and wife of
Cretheus the son of Aeolus.94 She fell in love with the river Enipeus
who is much the most beautiful river in the whole world. Once when she
was taking a walk by his side as usual, Neptune, disguised as her
lover, lay with her at the mouth of the river, and a huge blue wave
arched itself like a mountain over them to hide both woman and god,
whereon he loosed her virgin girdle and laid her in a deep slumber.
When the god had accomplished the deed of love, he took her hand in his
own and said, ‘Tyro, rejoice in all good will; the embraces of the gods
are not fruitless, and you will have fine twins about this time twelve
months. Take great care of them. I am Neptune, so now go home, but hold
your tongue and do not tell any one.’

“Then he dived under the sea, and she in due course bore Pelias and
Neleus, who both of them served Jove with all their might. Pelias was a
great breeder of sheep and lived in Iolcus, but the other lived in
Pylos. The rest of her children were by Cretheus, namely, Aeson,
Pheres, and Amythaon, who was a mighty warrior and charioteer.

“Next to her I saw Antiope, daughter to Asopus, who could boast of
having slept in the arms of even Jove himself, and who bore him two
sons Amphion and Zethus. These founded Thebes with its seven gates, and
built a wall all round it; for strong though they were they could not
hold Thebes till they had walled it.

“Then I saw Alcmena, the wife of Amphitryon, who also bore to Jove
indomitable Hercules; and Megara who was daughter to great King Creon,
and married the redoubtable son of Amphitryon.

“I also saw fair Epicaste mother of king Oedipodes whose awful lot it
was to marry her own son without suspecting it. He married her after
having killed his father, but the gods proclaimed the whole story to
the world; whereon he remained king of Thebes, in great grief for the
spite the gods had borne him; but Epicaste went to the house of the
mighty jailor Hades, having hanged herself for grief, and the avenging
spirits haunted him as for an outraged mother—to his ruing bitterly
thereafter.

“Then I saw Chloris, whom Neleus married for her beauty, having given
priceless presents for her. She was youngest daughter to Amphion son of
Iasus and king of Minyan Orchomenus, and was Queen in Pylos. She bore
Nestor, Chromius, and Periclymenus, and she also bore that marvellously
lovely woman Pero, who was wooed by all the country round; but Neleus
would only give her to him who should raid the cattle of Iphicles from
the grazing grounds of Phylace, and this was a hard task. The only man
who would undertake to raid them was a certain excellent seer,95 but
the will of heaven was against him, for the rangers of the cattle
caught him and put him in prison; nevertheless when a full year had
passed and the same season came round again, Iphicles set him at
liberty, after he had expounded all the oracles of heaven. Thus, then,
was the will of Jove accomplished.

“And I saw Leda the wife of Tyndarus, who bore him two famous sons,
Castor breaker of horses, and Pollux the mighty boxer. Both these
heroes are lying under the earth, though they are still alive, for by a
special dispensation of Jove, they die and come to life again, each one
of them every other day throughout all time, and they have the rank of
gods.

“After her I saw Iphimedeia wife of Aloeus who boasted the embrace of
Neptune. She bore two sons Otus and Ephialtes, but both were short
lived. They were the finest children that were ever born in this world,
and the best looking, Orion only excepted; for at nine years old they
were nine fathoms high, and measured nine cubits round the chest. They
threatened to make war with the gods in Olympus, and tried to set Mount
Ossa on the top of Mount Olympus, and Mount Pelion on the top of Ossa,
that they might scale heaven itself, and they would have done it too if
they had been grown up, but Apollo, son of Leto, killed both of them,
before they had got so much as a sign of hair upon their cheeks or
chin.

“Then I saw Phaedra, and Procris, and fair Ariadne daughter of the
magician Minos, whom Theseus was carrying off from Crete to Athens, but
he did not enjoy her, for before he could do so Diana killed her in the
island of Dia on account of what Bacchus had said against her.

“I also saw Maera and Clymene and hateful Eriphyle, who sold her own
husband for gold. But it would take me all night if I were to name
every single one of the wives and daughters of heroes whom I saw, and
it is time for me to go to bed, either on board ship with my crew, or
here. As for my escort, heaven and yourselves will see to it.”

Here he ended, and the guests sat all of them enthralled and speechless
throughout the covered cloister. Then Arete said to them:—

“What do you think of this man, O Phaeacians? Is he not tall and good
looking, and is he not clever? True, he is my own guest, but all of you
share in the distinction. Do not be in a hurry to send him away, nor
niggardly in the presents you make to one who is in such great need,
for heaven has blessed all of you with great abundance.”

Then spoke the aged hero Echeneus who was one of the oldest men among
them, “My friends,” said he, “what our august queen has just said to us
is both reasonable and to the purpose, therefore be persuaded by it;
but the decision whether in word or deed rests ultimately with King
Alcinous.”

“The thing shall be done,” exclaimed Alcinous, “as surely as I still
live and reign over the Phaeacians. Our guest is indeed very anxious to
get home, still we must persuade him to remain with us until to-morrow,
by which time I shall be able to get together the whole sum that I mean
to give him. As regards his escort it will be a matter for you all, and
mine above all others as the chief person among you.”

And Ulysses answered, “King Alcinous, if you were to bid me to stay
here for a whole twelve months, and then speed me on my way, loaded
with your noble gifts, I should obey you gladly and it would redound
greatly to my advantage, for I should return fuller-handed to my own
people, and should thus be more respected and beloved by all who see me
when I get back to Ithaca.”

“Ulysses,” replied Alcinous, “not one of us who sees you has any idea
that you are a charlatan or a swindler. I know there are many people
going about who tell such plausible stories that it is very hard to see
through them, but there is a style about your language which assures me
of your good disposition. Moreover you have told the story of your own
misfortunes, and those of the Argives, as though you were a practiced
bard; but tell me, and tell me true, whether you saw any of the mighty
heroes who went to Troy at the same time with yourself, and perished
there. The evenings are still at their longest, and it is not yet bed
time—go on, therefore, with your divine story, for I could stay here
listening till tomorrow morning, so long as you will continue to tell
us of your adventures.”

“Alcinous,” answered Ulysses, “there is a time for making speeches, and
a time for going to bed; nevertheless, since you so desire, I will not
refrain from telling you the still sadder tale of those of my comrades
who did not fall fighting with the Trojans, but perished on their
return, through the treachery of a wicked woman.

“When Proserpine had dismissed the female ghosts in all directions, the
ghost of Agamemnon son of Atreus came sadly up to me, surrounded by
those who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus. As soon as
he had tasted the blood, he knew me, and weeping bitterly stretched out
his arms towards me to embrace me; but he had no strength nor substance
any more, and I too wept and pitied him as I beheld him. ‘How did you
come by your death,’ said I, ‘King Agamemnon? Did Neptune raise his
winds and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies
make an end of you on the main land when you were cattle-lifting or
sheep-stealing, or while they were fighting in defence of their wives
and city?’

“‘Ulysses,’ he answered, ‘noble son of Laertes, I was not lost at sea
in any storm of Neptune’s raising, nor did my foes despatch me upon the
mainland, but Aegisthus and my wicked wife were the death of me between
them. He asked me to his house, feasted me, and then butchered me most
miserably as though I were a fat beast in a slaughter house, while all
around me my comrades were slain like sheep or pigs for the wedding
breakfast, or picnic, or gorgeous banquet of some great nobleman. You
must have seen numbers of men killed either in a general engagement, or
in single combat, but you never saw anything so truly pitiable as the
way in which we fell in that cloister, with the mixing bowl and the
loaded tables lying all about, and the ground reeking with our blood. I
heard Priam’s daughter Cassandra scream as Clytemnestra killed her
close beside me. I lay dying upon the earth with the sword in my body,
and raised my hands to kill the slut of a murderess, but she slipped
away from me; she would not even close my lips nor my eyes when I was
dying, for there is nothing in this world so cruel and so shameless as
a woman when she has fallen into such guilt as hers was. Fancy
murdering her own husband! I thought I was going to be welcomed home by
my children and my servants, but her abominable crime has brought
disgrace on herself and all women who shall come after—even on the good
ones.’

“And I said, ‘In truth Jove has hated the house of Atreus from first to
last in the matter of their women’s counsels. See how many of us fell
for Helen’s sake, and now it seems that Clytemnestra hatched mischief
against you too during your absence.’

“‘Be sure, therefore,’ continued Agamemnon, ‘and not be too friendly
even with your own wife. Do not tell her all that you know perfectly
well yourself. Tell her a part only, and keep your own counsel about
the rest. Not that your wife, Ulysses, is likely to murder you, for
Penelope is a very admirable woman, and has an excellent nature. We
left her a young bride with an infant at her breast when we set out for
Troy. This child no doubt is now grown up happily to man’s estate,96
and he and his father will have a joyful meeting and embrace one
another as it is right they should do, whereas my wicked wife did not
even allow me the happiness of looking upon my son, but killed me ere I
could do so. Furthermore I say—and lay my saying to your heart—do not
tell people when you are bringing your ship to Ithaca, but steal a
march upon them, for after all this there is no trusting women. But now
tell me, and tell me true, can you give me any news of my son Orestes?
Is he in Orchomenus, or at Pylos, or is he at Sparta with Menelaus—for
I presume that he is still living.’

“And I said, ‘Agamemnon, why do you ask me? I do not know whether your
son is alive or dead, and it is not right to talk when one does not
know.’

“As we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another the
ghost of Achilles came up to us with Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax
who was the finest and goodliest man of all the Danaans after the son
of Peleus. The fleet descendant of Aeacus knew me and spoke piteously,
saying, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, what deed of daring will you
undertake next, that you venture down to the house of Hades among us
silly dead, who are but the ghosts of them that can labour no more?’

“And I said, ‘Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of the
Achaeans, I came to consult Teiresias, and see if he could advise me
about my return home to Ithaca, for I have never yet been able to get
near the Achaean land, nor to set foot in my own country, but have been
in trouble all the time. As for you, Achilles, no one was ever yet so
fortunate as you have been, nor ever will be, for you were adored by
all us Argives as long as you were alive, and now that you are here you
are a great prince among the dead. Do not, therefore, take it so much
to heart even if you are dead.’

“‘Say not a word,’ he answered, ‘in death’s favour; I would rather be a
paid servant in a poor man’s house and be above ground than king of
kings among the dead. But give me news about my son; is he gone to the
wars and will he be a great soldier, or is this not so? Tell me also if
you have heard anything about my father Peleus—does he still rule among
the Myrmidons, or do they show him no respect throughout Hellas and
Phthia now that he is old and his limbs fail him? Could I but stand by
his side, in the light of day, with the same strength that I had when I
killed the bravest of our foes upon the plain of Troy—could I but be as
I then was and go even for a short time to my father’s house, any one
who tried to do him violence or supersede him would soon rue it.’

“‘I have heard nothing,’ I answered, ‘of Peleus, but I can tell you all
about your son Neoptolemus, for I took him in my own ship from Scyros
with the Achaeans. In our councils of war before Troy he was always
first to speak, and his judgement was unerring. Nestor and I were the
only two who could surpass him; and when it came to fighting on the
plain of Troy, he would never remain with the body of his men, but
would dash on far in front, foremost of them all in valour. Many a man
did he kill in battle—I cannot name every single one of those whom he
slew while fighting on the side of the Argives, but will only say how
he killed that valiant hero Eurypylus son of Telephus, who was the
handsomest man I ever saw except Memnon; many others also of the
Ceteians fell around him by reason of a woman’s bribes. Moreover, when
all the bravest of the Argives went inside the horse that Epeus had
made, and it was left to me to settle when we should either open the
door of our ambuscade, or close it, though all the other leaders and
chief men among the Danaans were drying their eyes and quaking in every
limb, I never once saw him turn pale nor wipe a tear from his cheek; he
was all the time urging me to break out from the horse—grasping the
handle of his sword and his bronze-shod spear, and breathing fury
against the foe. Yet when we had sacked the city of Priam he got his
handsome share of the prize money and went on board (such is the
fortune of war) without a wound upon him, neither from a thrown spear
nor in close combat, for the rage of Mars is a matter of great chance.’

“When I had told him this, the ghost of Achilles strode off across a
meadow full of asphodel, exulting over what I had said concerning the
prowess of his son.

“The ghosts of other dead men stood near me and told me each his own
melancholy tale; but that of Ajax son of Telamon alone held aloof—still
angry with me for having won the cause in our dispute about the armour
of Achilles. Thetis had offered it as a prize, but the Trojan prisoners
and Minerva were the judges. Would that I had never gained the day in
such a contest, for it cost the life of Ajax, who was foremost of all
the Danaans after the son of Peleus, alike in stature and prowess.

“When I saw him I tried to pacify him and said, ‘Ajax, will you not
forget and forgive even in death, but must the judgement about that
hateful armour still rankle with you? It cost us Argives dear enough to
lose such a tower of strength as you were to us. We mourned you as much
as we mourned Achilles son of Peleus himself, nor can the blame be laid
on anything but on the spite which Jove bore against the Danaans, for
it was this that made him counsel your destruction—come hither,
therefore, bring your proud spirit into subjection, and hear what I can
tell you.’

“He would not answer, but turned away to Erebus and to the other
ghosts; nevertheless, I should have made him talk to me in spite of his
being so angry, or I should have gone on talking to him,97 only that
there were still others among the dead whom I desired to see.

“Then I saw Minos son of Jove with his golden sceptre in his hand
sitting in judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sitting
and standing round him in the spacious house of Hades, to learn his
sentences upon them.

“After him I saw huge Orion in a meadow full of asphodel driving the
ghosts of the wild beasts that he had killed upon the mountains, and he
had a great bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever.

“And I saw Tityus son of Gaia stretched upon the plain and covering
some nine acres of ground. Two vultures on either side of him were
digging their beaks into his liver, and he kept on trying to beat them
off with his hands, but could not; for he had violated Jove’s mistress
Leto as she was going through Panopeus on her way to Pytho.

“I saw also the dreadful fate of Tantalus, who stood in a lake that
reached his chin; he was dying to quench his thirst, but could never
reach the water, for whenever the poor creature stooped to drink, it
dried up and vanished, so that there was nothing but dry ground—parched
by the spite of heaven. There were tall trees, moreover, that shed
their fruit over his head—pears, pomegranates, apples, sweet figs and
juicy olives, but whenever the poor creature stretched out his hand to
take some, the wind tossed the branches back again to the clouds.

“And I saw Sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stone
with both his hands. With hands and feet he tried to roll it up to the
top of the hill, but always, just before he could roll it over on to
the other side, its weight would be too much for him, and the pitiless
stone98 would come thundering down again on to the plain. Then he would
begin trying to push it up hill again, and the sweat ran off him and
the steam rose after him.

“After him I saw mighty Hercules, but it was his phantom only, for he
is feasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to wife,
who is daughter of Jove and Juno. The ghosts were screaming round him
like scared birds flying all whithers. He looked black as night with
his bare bow in his hands and his arrow on the string, glaring around
as though ever on the point of taking aim. About his breast there was a
wondrous golden belt adorned in the most marvellous fashion with bears,
wild boars, and lions with gleaming eyes; there was also war, battle,
and death. The man who made that belt, do what he might, would never be
able to make another like it. Hercules knew me at once when he saw me,
and spoke piteously, saying, ‘My poor Ulysses, noble son of Laertes,
are you too leading the same sorry kind of life that I did when I was
above ground? I was son of Jove, but I went through an infinity of
suffering, for I became bondsman to one who was far beneath me—a low
fellow who set me all manner of labours. He once sent me here to fetch
the hell-hound—for he did not think he could find anything harder for
me than this, but I got the hound out of Hades and brought him to him,
for Mercury and Minerva helped me.’

“On this Hercules went down again into the house of Hades, but I stayed
where I was in case some other of the mighty dead should come to me.
And I should have seen still other of them that are gone before, whom I
would fain have seen—Theseus and Pirithous—glorious children of the
gods, but so many thousands of ghosts came round me and uttered such
appalling cries, that I was panic stricken lest Proserpine should send
up from the house of Hades the head of that awful monster Gorgon. On
this I hastened back to my ship and ordered my men to go on board at
once and loose the hawsers; so they embarked and took their places,
whereon the ship went down the stream of the river Oceanus. We had to
row at first, but presently a fair wind sprang up.




BOOK XII


THE SIRENS, SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS, THE CATTLE OF THE SUN.


“After we were clear of the river Oceanus, and had got out into the
open sea, we went on till we reached the Aeaean island where there is
dawn and sun-rise as in other places. We then drew our ship on to the
sands and got out of her on to the shore, where we went to sleep and
waited till day should break.

“Then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I sent
some men to Circe’s house to fetch the body of Elpenor. We cut firewood
from a wood where the headland jutted out into the sea, and after we
had wept over him and lamented him we performed his funeral rites. When
his body and armour had been burned to ashes, we raised a cairn, set a
stone over it, and at the top of the cairn we fixed the oar that he had
been used to row with.

“While we were doing all this, Circe, who knew that we had got back
from the house of Hades, dressed herself and came to us as fast as she
could; and her maid servants came with her bringing us bread, meat, and
wine. Then she stood in the midst of us and said, ‘You have done a bold
thing in going down alive to the house of Hades, and you will have died
twice, to other people’s once; now, then, stay here for the rest of the
day, feast your fill, and go on with your voyage at daybreak tomorrow
morning. In the meantime I will tell Ulysses about your course, and
will explain everything to him so as to prevent your suffering from
misadventure either by land or sea.’

“We agreed to do as she had said, and feasted through the livelong day
to the going down of the sun, but when the sun had set and it came on
dark, the men laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the
ship. Then Circe took me by the hand and bade me be seated away from
the others, while she reclined by my side and asked me all about our
adventures.

“‘So far so good,’ said she, when I had ended my story, ‘and now pay
attention to what I am about to tell you—heaven itself, indeed, will
recall it to your recollection. First you will come to the Sirens who
enchant all who come near them. If any one unwarily draws in too close
and hears the singing of the Sirens, his wife and children will never
welcome him home again, for they sit in a green field and warble him to
death with the sweetness of their song. There is a great heap of dead
men’s bones lying all around, with the flesh still rotting off them.
Therefore pass these Sirens by, and stop your men’s ears with wax that
none of them may hear; but if you like you can listen yourself, for you
may get the men to bind you as you stand upright on a cross piece half
way up the mast,99 and they must lash the rope’s ends to the mast
itself, that you may have the pleasure of listening. If you beg and
pray the men to unloose you, then they must bind you faster.

“‘When your crew have taken you past these Sirens, I cannot give you
coherent directions100 as to which of two courses you are to take; I
will lay the two alternatives before you, and you must consider them
for yourself. On the one hand there are some overhanging rocks against
which the deep blue waves of Amphitrite beat with terrific fury; the
blessed gods call these rocks the Wanderers. Here not even a bird may
pass, no, not even the timid doves that bring ambrosia to Father Jove,
but the sheer rock always carries off one of them, and Father Jove has
to send another to make up their number; no ship that ever yet came to
these rocks has got away again, but the waves and whirlwinds of fire
are freighted with wreckage and with the bodies of dead men. The only
vessel that ever sailed and got through, was the famous Argo on her way
from the house of Aetes, and she too would have gone against these
great rocks, only that Juno piloted her past them for the love she bore
to Jason.

“‘Of these two rocks the one reaches heaven and its peak is lost in a
dark cloud. This never leaves it, so that the top is never clear not
even in summer and early autumn. No man though he had twenty hands and
twenty feet could get a foothold on it and climb it, for it runs sheer
up, as smooth as though it had been polished. In the middle of it there
is a large cavern, looking West and turned towards Erebus; you must
take your ship this way, but the cave is so high up that not even the
stoutest archer could send an arrow into it. Inside it Scylla sits and
yelps with a voice that you might take to be that of a young hound, but
in truth she is a dreadful monster and no one—not even a god—could face
her without being terror-struck. She has twelve mis-shapen feet, and
six necks of the most prodigious length; and at the end of each neck
she has a frightful head with three rows of teeth in each, all set very
close together, so that they would crunch any one to death in a moment,
and she sits deep within her shady cell thrusting out her heads and
peering all round the rock, fishing for dolphins or dogfish or any
larger monster that she can catch, of the thousands with which
Amphitrite teems. No ship ever yet got past her without losing some
men, for she shoots out all her heads at once, and carries off a man in
each mouth.

“‘You will find the other rock lie lower, but they are so close
together that there is not more than a bow-shot between them. [A large
fig tree in full leaf101 grows upon it], and under it lies the sucking
whirlpool of Charybdis. Three times in the day does she vomit forth her
waters, and three times she sucks them down again; see that you be not
there when she is sucking, for if you are, Neptune himself could not
save you; you must hug the Scylla side and drive ship by as fast as you
can, for you had better lose six men than your whole crew.’

“‘Is there no way,’ said I, ‘of escaping Charybdis, and at the same
time keeping Scylla off when she is trying to harm my men?’

“‘You dare devil,’ replied the goddess, ‘you are always wanting to
fight somebody or something; you will not let yourself be beaten even
by the immortals. For Scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage,
extreme, rude, cruel and invincible. There is no help for it; your best
chance will be to get by her as fast as ever you can, for if you dawdle
about her rock while you are putting on your armour, she may catch you
with a second cast of her six heads, and snap up another half dozen of
your men; so drive your ship past her at full speed, and roar out
lustily to Crataiis who is Scylla’s dam, bad luck to her; she will then
stop her from making a second raid upon you.’

“‘You will now come to the Thrinacian island, and here you will see
many herds of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the sun-god—seven
herds of cattle and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in each
flock. They do not breed, nor do they become fewer in number, and they
are tended by the goddesses Phaethusa and Lampetie, who are children of
the sun-god Hyperion by Neaera. Their mother when she had borne them
and had done suckling them sent them to the Thrinacian island, which
was a long way off, to live there and look after their father’s flocks
and herds. If you leave these flocks unharmed, and think of nothing but
getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you
harm them, then I forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship and
of your comrades; and even though you may yourself escape, you will
return late, in bad plight, after losing all your men.’

“Here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold began to show in heaven,
whereon she returned inland. I then went on board and told my men to
loose the ship from her moorings; so they at once got into her, took
their places, and began to smite the grey sea with their oars.
Presently the great and cunning goddess Circe befriended us with a fair
wind that blew dead aft, and staid steadily with us, keeping our sails
well filled, so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear, and
let her go as wind and helmsman headed her.

“Then, being much troubled in mind, I said to my men, ‘My friends, it
is not right that one or two of us alone should know the prophecies
that Circe has made me, I will therefore tell you about them, so that
whether we live or die we may do so with our eyes open. First she said
we were to keep clear of the Sirens, who sit and sing most beautifully
in a field of flowers; but she said I might hear them myself so long as
no one else did. Therefore, take me and bind me to the crosspiece half
way up the mast; bind me as I stand upright, with a bond so fast that I
cannot possibly break away, and lash the rope’s ends to the mast
itself. If I beg and pray you to set me free, then bind me more tightly
still.’

“I had hardly finished telling everything to the men before we reached
the island of the two Sirens,102 for the wind had been very favourable.
Then all of a sudden it fell dead calm; there was not a breath of wind
nor a ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails and stowed
them; then taking to their oars they whitened the water with the foam
they raised in rowing. Meanwhile I look a large wheel of wax and cut it
up small with my sword. Then I kneaded the wax in my strong hands till
it became soft, which it soon did between the kneading and the rays of
the sun-god son of Hyperion. Then I stopped the ears of all my men, and
they bound me hands and feet to the mast as I stood upright on the
cross piece; but they went on rowing themselves. When we had got within
earshot of the land, and the ship was going at a good rate, the Sirens
saw that we were getting in shore and began with their singing.

“‘Come here,’ they sang, ‘renowned Ulysses, honour to the Achaean name,
and listen to our two voices. No one ever sailed past us without
staying to hear the enchanting sweetness of our song—and he who listens
will go on his way not only charmed, but wiser, for we know all the
ills that the gods laid upon the Argives and Trojans before Troy, and
can tell you everything that is going to happen over the whole world.’

“They sang these words most musically, and as I longed to hear them
further I made signs by frowning to my men that they should set me
free; but they quickened their stroke, and Eurylochus and Perimedes
bound me with still stronger bonds till we had got out of hearing of
the Sirens’ voices. Then my men took the wax from their ears and
unbound me.

“Immediately after we had got past the island I saw a great wave from
which spray was rising, and I heard a loud roaring sound. The men were
so frightened that they loosed hold of their oars, for the whole sea
resounded with the rushing of the waters,103 but the ship stayed where
it was, for the men had left off rowing. I went round, therefore, and
exhorted them man by man not to lose heart.

“‘My friends,’ said I, ‘this is not the first time that we have been in
danger, and we are in nothing like so bad a case as when the Cyclops
shut us up in his cave; nevertheless, my courage and wise counsel saved
us then, and we shall live to look back on all this as well. Now,
therefore, let us all do as I say, trust in Jove and row on with might
and main. As for you, coxswain, these are your orders; attend to them,
for the ship is in your hands; turn her head away from these steaming
rapids and hug the rock, or she will give you the slip and be over
yonder before you know where you are, and you will be the death of us.’

“So they did as I told them; but I said nothing about the awful monster
Scylla, for I knew the men would not go on rowing if I did, but would
huddle together in the hold. In one thing only did I disobey Circe’s
strict instructions—I put on my armour. Then seizing two strong spears
I took my stand on the ship’s bows, for it was there that I expected
first to see the monster of the rock, who was to do my men so much
harm; but I could not make her out anywhere, though I strained my eyes
with looking the gloomy rock all over and over.

“Then we entered the Straits in great fear of mind, for on the one hand
was Scylla, and on the other dread Charybdis kept sucking up the salt
water. As she vomited it up, it was like the water in a cauldron when
it is boiling over upon a great fire, and the spray reached the top of
the rocks on either side. When she began to suck again, we could see
the water all inside whirling round and round, and it made a deafening
sound as it broke against the rocks. We could see the bottom of the
whirlpool all black with sand and mud, and the men were at their wits
ends for fear. While we were taken up with this, and were expecting
each moment to be our last, Scylla pounced down suddenly upon us and
snatched up my six best men. I was looking at once after both ship and
men, and in a moment I saw their hands and feet ever so high above me,
struggling in the air as Scylla was carrying them off, and I heard them
call out my name in one last despairing cry. As a fisherman, seated,
spear in hand, upon some jutting rock104 throws bait into the water to
deceive the poor little fishes, and spears them with the ox’s horn with
which his spear is shod, throwing them gasping on to the land as he
catches them one by one—even so did Scylla land these panting creatures
on her rock and munch them up at the mouth of her den, while they
screamed and stretched out their hands to me in their mortal agony.
This was the most sickening sight that I saw throughout all my voyages.

“When we had passed the [Wandering] rocks, with Scylla and terrible
Charybdis, we reached the noble island of the sun-god, where were the
goodly cattle and sheep belonging to the sun Hyperion. While still at
sea in my ship I could bear the cattle lowing as they came home to the
yards, and the sheep bleating. Then I remembered what the blind Theban
prophet Teiresias had told me, and how carefully Aeaean Circe had
warned me to shun the island of the blessed sun-god. So being much
troubled I said to the men, ‘My men, I know you are hard pressed, but
listen while I tell you the prophecy that Teiresias made me, and how
carefully Aeaean Circe warned me to shun the island of the blessed
sun-god, for it was here, she said, that our worst danger would lie.
Head the ship, therefore, away from the island.’

“The men were in despair at this, and Eurylochus at once gave me an
insolent answer. ‘Ulysses,’ said he, ‘you are cruel; you are very
strong yourself and never get worn out; you seem to be made of iron,
and now, though your men are exhausted with toil and want of sleep, you
will not let them land and cook themselves a good supper upon this
island, but bid them put out to sea and go faring fruitlessly on
through the watches of the flying night. It is by night that the winds
blow hardest and do so much damage; how can we escape should one of
those sudden squalls spring up from South West or West, which so often
wreck a vessel when our lords the gods are unpropitious? Now,
therefore, let us obey the behests of night and prepare our supper here
hard by the ship; to-morrow morning we will go on board again and put
out to sea.’

“Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. I saw that
heaven meant us a mischief and said, ‘You force me to yield, for you
are many against one, but at any rate each one of you must take his
solemn oath that if he meet with a herd of cattle or a large flock of
sheep, he will not be so mad as to kill a single head of either, but
will be satisfied with the food that Circe has given us.’

“They all swore as I bade them, and when they had completed their oath
we made the ship fast in a harbour that was near a stream of fresh
water, and the men went ashore and cooked their suppers. As soon as
they had had enough to eat and drink, they began talking about their
poor comrades whom Scylla had snatched up and eaten; this set them
weeping and they went on crying till they fell off into a sound sleep.

“In the third watch of the night when the stars had shifted their
places, Jove raised a great gale of wind that flew a hurricane so that
land and sea were covered with thick clouds, and night sprang forth out
of the heavens. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn,
appeared, we brought the ship to land and drew her into a cave wherein
the sea-nymphs hold their courts and dances, and I called the men
together in council.

“‘My friends,’ said I, ‘we have meat and drink in the ship, let us
mind, therefore, and not touch the cattle, or we shall suffer for it;
for these cattle and sheep belong to the mighty sun, who sees and gives
ear to everything.’ And again they promised that they would obey.

“For a whole month the wind blew steadily from the South, and there was
no other wind, but only South and East.105 As long as corn and wine
held out the men did not touch the cattle when they were hungry; when,
however, they had eaten all there was in the ship, they were forced to
go further afield, with hook and line, catching birds, and taking
whatever they could lay their hands on; for they were starving. One
day, therefore, I went up inland that I might pray heaven to show me
some means of getting away. When I had gone far enough to be clear of
all my men, and had found a place that was well sheltered from the
wind, I washed my hands and prayed to all the gods in Olympus till by
and by they sent me off into a sweet sleep.

“Meanwhile Eurylochus had been giving evil counsel to the men, ‘Listen
to me,’ said he, ‘my poor comrades. All deaths are bad enough but there
is none so bad as famine. Why should not we drive in the best of these
cows and offer them in sacrifice to the immortal gods? If we ever get
back to Ithaca, we can build a fine temple to the sun-god and enrich it
with every kind of ornament; if, however, he is determined to sink our
ship out of revenge for these horned cattle, and the other gods are of
the same mind, I for one would rather drink salt water once for all and
have done with it, than be starved to death by inches in such a desert
island as this is.’

“Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. Now the cattle,
so fair and goodly, were feeding not far from the ship; the men,
therefore, drove in the best of them, and they all stood round them
saying their prayers, and using young oak-shoots instead of
barley-meal, for there was no barley left. When they had done praying
they killed the cows and dressed their carcasses; they cut out the
thigh bones, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and set some
pieces of raw meat on top of them. They had no wine with which to make
drink-offerings over the sacrifice while it was cooking, so they kept
pouring on a little water from time to time while the inward meats were
being grilled; then, when the thigh bones were burned and they had
tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small and put the pieces
upon the spits.

“By this time my deep sleep had left me, and I turned back to the ship
and to the sea shore. As I drew near I began to smell hot roast meat,
so I groaned out a prayer to the immortal gods. ‘Father Jove,’ I
exclaimed, ‘and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, you
have done me a cruel mischief by the sleep into which you have sent me;
see what fine work these men of mine have been making in my absence.’

“Meanwhile Lampetie went straight off to the sun and told him we had
been killing his cows, whereon he flew into a great rage, and said to
the immortals, ‘Father Jove, and all you other gods who live in
everlasting bliss, I must have vengeance on the crew of Ulysses’ ship:
they have had the insolence to kill my cows, which were the one thing I
loved to look upon, whether I was going up heaven or down again. If
they do not square accounts with me about my cows, I will go down to
Hades and shine there among the dead.’

“‘Sun,’ said Jove, ‘go on shining upon us gods and upon mankind over
the fruitful earth. I will shiver their ship into little pieces with a
bolt of white lightning as soon as they get out to sea.’

“I was told all this by Calypso, who said she had heard it from the
mouth of Mercury.

“As soon as I got down to my ship and to the sea shore I rebuked each
one of the men separately, but we could see no way out of it, for the
cows were dead already. And indeed the gods began at once to show signs
and wonders among us, for the hides of the cattle crawled about, and
the joints upon the spits began to low like cows, and the meat, whether
cooked or raw, kept on making a noise just as cows do.

“For six days my men kept driving in the best cows and feasting upon
them, but when Jove the son of Saturn had added a seventh day, the fury
of the gale abated; we therefore went on board, raised our masts,
spread sail, and put out to sea. As soon as we were well away from the
island, and could see nothing but sky and sea, the son of Saturn raised
a black cloud over our ship, and the sea grew dark beneath it. We did
not get on much further, for in another moment we were caught by a
terrific squall from the West that snapped the forestays of the mast so
that it fell aft, while all the ship’s gear tumbled about at the bottom
of the vessel. The mast fell upon the head of the helmsman in the
ship’s stern, so that the bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and
he fell overboard as though he were diving, with no more life left in
him.

“Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts, and the ship went round and
round, and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck
it. The men all fell into the sea; they were carried about in the water
round the ship, looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently
deprived them of all chance of getting home again.

“I stuck to the ship till the sea knocked her sides from her keel
(which drifted about by itself) and struck the mast out of her in the
direction of the keel; but there was a backstay of stout ox-thong still
hanging about it, and with this I lashed the mast and keel together,
and getting astride of them was carried wherever the winds chose to
take me.

“[The gale from the West had now spent its force, and the wind got into
the South again, which frightened me lest I should be taken back to the
terrible whirlpool of Charybdis. This indeed was what actually
happened, for I was borne along by the waves all night, and by sunrise
had reached the rock of Scylla, and the whirlpool. She was then sucking
down the salt sea water,106 but I was carried aloft toward the fig
tree, which I caught hold of and clung on to like a bat. I could not
plant my feet anywhere so as to stand securely, for the roots were a
long way off and the boughs that overshadowed the whole pool were too
high, too vast, and too far apart for me to reach them; so I hung
patiently on, waiting till the pool should discharge my mast and raft
again—and a very long while it seemed. A jury-man is not more glad to
get home to supper, after having been long detained in court by
troublesome cases, than I was to see my raft beginning to work its way
out of the whirlpool again. At last I let go with my hands and feet,
and fell heavily into the sea, hard by my raft on to which I then got,
and began to row with my hands. As for Scylla, the father of gods and
men would not let her get further sight of me—otherwise I should have
certainly been lost.107

“Hence I was carried along for nine days till on the tenth night the
gods stranded me on the Ogygian island, where dwells the great and
powerful goddess Calypso. She took me in and was kind to me, but I need
say no more about this, for I told you and your noble wife all about it
yesterday, and I hate saying the same thing over and over again.”




BOOK XIII


ULYSSES LEAVES SCHERIA AND RETURNS TO ITHACA.


Thus did he speak, and they all held their peace throughout the covered
cloister, enthralled by the charm of his story, till presently Alcinous
began to speak.

“Ulysses,” said he, “now that you have reached my house I doubt not you
will get home without further misadventure no matter how much you have
suffered in the past. To you others, however, who come here night after
night to drink my choicest wine and listen to my bard, I would insist
as follows. Our guest has already packed up the clothes, wrought
gold,108 and other valuables which you have brought for his acceptance;
let us now, therefore, present him further, each one of us, with a
large tripod and a cauldron. We will recoup ourselves by the levy of a
general rate; for private individuals cannot be expected to bear the
burden of such a handsome present.”

Every one approved of this, and then they went home to bed each in his
own abode. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared they
hurried down to the ship and brought their cauldrons with them.
Alcinous went on board and saw everything so securely stowed under the
ship’s benches that nothing could break adrift and injure the rowers.
Then they went to the house of Alcinous to get dinner, and he
sacrificed a bull for them in honour of Jove who is the lord of all.
They set the steaks to grill and made an excellent dinner, after which
the inspired bard, Demodocus, who was a favourite with every one, sang
to them; but Ulysses kept on turning his eyes towards the sun, as
though to hasten his setting, for he was longing to be on his way. As
one who has been all day ploughing a fallow field with a couple of oxen
keeps thinking about his supper and is glad when night comes that he
may go and get it, for it is all his legs can do to carry him, even so
did Ulysses rejoice when the sun went down, and he at once said to the
Phaeacians, addressing himself more particularly to King Alcinous:

“Sir, and all of you, farewell. Make your drink-offerings and send me
on my way rejoicing, for you have fulfilled my heart’s desire by giving
me an escort, and making me presents, which heaven grant that I may
turn to good account; may I find my admirable wife living in peace
among friends,109 and may you whom I leave behind me give satisfaction
to your wives and children;110 may heaven vouchsafe you every good
grace, and may no evil thing come among your people.”

Thus did he speak. His hearers all of them approved his saying and
agreed that he should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken
reasonably. Alcinous therefore said to his servant, “Pontonous, mix
some wine and hand it round to everybody, that we may offer a prayer to
father Jove, and speed our guest upon his way.”

Pontonous mixed the wine and handed it to every one in turn; the others
each from his own seat made a drink-offering to the blessed gods that
live in heaven, but Ulysses rose and placed the double cup in the hands
of queen Arete.

“Farewell, queen,” said he, “henceforward and for ever, till age and
death, the common lot of mankind, lay their hands upon you. I now take
my leave; be happy in this house with your children, your people, and
with king Alcinous.”

As he spoke he crossed the threshold, and Alcinous sent a man to
conduct him to his ship and to the sea shore. Arete also sent some
maidservants with him—one with a clean shirt and cloak, another to
carry his strong box, and a third with corn and wine. When they got to
the water side the crew took these things and put them on board, with
all the meat and drink; but for Ulysses they spread a rug and a linen
sheet on deck that he might sleep soundly in the stern of the ship.
Then he too went on board and lay down without a word, but the crew
took every man his place and loosed the hawser from the pierced stone
to which it had been bound. Thereon, when they began rowing out to sea,
Ulysses fell into a deep, sweet, and almost deathlike slumber.111

The ship bounded forward on her way as a four in hand chariot flies
over the course when the horses feel the whip. Her prow curvetted as it
were the neck of a stallion, and a great wave of dark blue water
seethed in her wake. She held steadily on her course, and even a
falcon, swiftest of all birds, could not have kept pace with her. Thus,
then, she cut her way through the water, carrying one who was as
cunning as the gods, but who was now sleeping peacefully, forgetful of
all that he had suffered both on the field of battle and by the waves
of the weary sea.

When the bright star that heralds the approach of dawn began to show,
the ship drew near to land.112 Now there is in Ithaca a haven of the
old merman Phorcys, which lies between two points that break the line
of the sea and shut the harbour in. These shelter it from the storms of
wind and sea that rage outside, so that, when once within it, a ship
may lie without being even moored. At the head of this harbour there is
a large olive tree, and at no great distance a fine overarching cavern
sacred to the nymphs who are called Naiads.113 There are mixing bowls
within it and wine-jars of stone, and the bees hive there. Moreover,
there are great looms of stone on which the nymphs weave their robes of
sea purple—very curious to see—and at all times there is water within
it. It has two entrances, one facing North by which mortals can go down
into the cave, while the other comes from the South and is more
mysterious; mortals cannot possibly get in by it, it is the way taken
by the gods.

Into this harbour, then, they took their ship, for they knew the
place.114 She had so much way upon her that she ran half her own length
on to the shore;115 when, however, they had landed, the first thing
they did was to lift Ulysses with his rug and linen sheet out of the
ship, and lay him down upon the sand still fast asleep. Then they took
out the presents which Minerva had persuaded the Phaeacians to give him
when he was setting out on his voyage homewards. They put these all
together by the root of the olive tree, away from the road, for fear
some passer by116 might come and steal them before Ulysses awoke; and
then they made the best of their way home again.

But Neptune did not forget the threats with which he had already
threatened Ulysses, so he took counsel with Jove. “Father Jove,” said
he, “I shall no longer be held in any sort of respect among you gods,
if mortals like the Phaeacians, who are my own flesh and blood, show
such small regard for me. I said I would let Ulysses get home when he
had suffered sufficiently. I did not say that he should never get home
at all, for I knew you had already nodded your head about it, and
promised that he should do so; but now they have brought him in a ship
fast asleep and have landed him in Ithaca after loading him with more
magnificent presents of bronze, gold, and raiment than he would ever
have brought back from Troy, if he had had his share of the spoil and
got home without misadventure.”

And Jove answered, “What, O Lord of the Earthquake, are you talking
about? The gods are by no means wanting in respect for you. It would be
monstrous were they to insult one so old and honoured as you are. As
regards mortals, however, if any of them is indulging in insolence and
treating you disrespectfully, it will always rest with yourself to deal
with him as you may think proper, so do just as you please.”

“I should have done so at once,” replied Neptune, “if I were not
anxious to avoid anything that might displease you; now, therefore, I
should like to wreck the Phaeacian ship as it is returning from its
escort. This will stop them from escorting people in future; and I
should also like to bury their city under a huge mountain.”

“My good friend,” answered Jove, “I should recommend you at the very
moment when the people from the city are watching the ship on her way,
to turn it into a rock near the land and looking like a ship. This will
astonish everybody, and you can then bury their city under the
mountain.”

When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went to Scheria where the
Phaeacians live, and stayed there till the ship, which was making rapid
way, had got close in. Then he went up to it, turned it into stone, and
drove it down with the flat of his hand so as to root it in the ground.
After this he went away.

The Phaeacians then began talking among themselves, and one would turn
towards his neighbour, saying, “Bless my heart, who is it that can have
rooted the ship in the sea just as she was getting into port? We could
see the whole of her only a moment ago.”

This was how they talked, but they knew nothing about it; and Alcinous
said, “I remember now the old prophecy of my father. He said that
Neptune would be angry with us for taking every one so safely over the
sea, and would one day wreck a Phaeacian ship as it was returning from
an escort, and bury our city under a high mountain. This was what my
old father used to say, and now it is all coming true.117 Now therefore
let us all do as I say; in the first place we must leave off giving
people escorts when they come here, and in the next let us sacrifice
twelve picked bulls to Neptune that he may have mercy upon us, and not
bury our city under the high mountain.” When the people heard this they
were afraid and got ready the bulls.

Thus did the chiefs and rulers of the Phaeacians pray to king Neptune,
standing round his altar; and at the same time118 Ulysses woke up once
more upon his own soil. He had been so long away that he did not know
it again; moreover, Jove’s daughter Minerva had made it a foggy day, so
that people might not know of his having come, and that she might tell
him everything without either his wife or his fellow citizens and
friends recognising him119 until he had taken his revenge upon the
wicked suitors. Everything, therefore, seemed quite different to
him—the long straight tracks, the harbours, the precipices, and the
goodly trees, appeared all changed as he started up and looked upon his
native land. So he smote his thighs with the flat of his hands and
cried aloud despairingly.

“Alas,” he exclaimed, “among what manner of people am I fallen? Are
they savage and uncivilised or hospitable and humane? Where shall I put
all this treasure, and which way shall I go? I wish I had staid over
there with the Phaeacians; or I could have gone to some other great
chief who would have been good to me and given me an escort. As it is I
do not know where to put my treasure, and I cannot leave it here for
fear somebody else should get hold of it. In good truth the chiefs and
rulers of the Phaeacians have not been dealing fairly by me, and have
left me in the wrong country; they said they would take me back to
Ithaca and they have not done so: may Jove the protector of suppliants
chastise them, for he watches over everybody and punishes those who do
wrong. Still, I suppose I must count my goods and see if the crew have
gone off with any of them.”