Chapter 6. Climene

Diligent search among the many scenarios of the improvisers from that time has failed to bring to light the script of "The Cheats of Scaramouche." We are told that the fortunes of the Binet troupe were soundly established on this play. They played it for the first time at Maure in the following week, with André-Louis in the title role. By now, he was known as Scaramouche to all the company and to the public alike. If he had acquitted himself well as Figaro-Scaramouche, he excelled himself in this new piece. Its scenario appeared to be very much the better of the two.

After Maure came Pipriac. They gave four performances there, featuring two of each of the scenarios that now formed the backbone of the Binet repertoire. In both plays, Scaramouche was beginning to find himself, and he materially improved his performances. The two pieces ran so smoothly now that Scaramouche actually suggested a bold idea to Binet. He proposed that after Fougeray, which they were to visit in the following week, they should tempt fortune in a real theater in the important town of Redon. The notion terrified Binet at first. But when he thought about it, and with his ambition fanned by André-Louis, he ended by allowing himself to succumb to the temptation.

It seemed to André-Louis in those days that he had found his real calling. He was not only beginning to like it, but actually looking forward to a career as an actor-author. This career might indeed lead him in the end to that Mecca of all comedians, the Comédie Française. And there were other possibilities. From writing skeleton scenarios for improvisers, he might pass to writing fully dialogued plays. He could write plays in the proper sense of the word, after the manner of Chénier, Églantine, and Beaumarchais.

The fact that he dreamed such dreams shows how kindly he had taken to the profession. Chance and M. Binet had conspired to thrust him into it. I do not doubt that he had real talent both as author and as actor. I am persuaded that if things had fallen out differently, he would have won a lasting place among French dramatists and fully realized his dream.

Now, even though it was a dream, he did not neglect the practical side of it.

"You realize," he told M. Binet, "that I have the power to make your fortune for you."

He and Binet were sitting alone together in the parlor of the inn at Pipriac, drinking a very excellent bottle of Volnay. It was the night after the fourth and last performance of "The Cheats" there. Business in Pipriac had been just as excellent as in Maure and Guichen. You will have gathered this from the fact that they were drinking Volnay.

"I will concede it, my dear Scaramouche, so that I may hear the sequel."

"I am disposed to exercise this power if the inducement is sufficient. You will realize that a man does not sell such exceptional gifts as mine for fifteen livres a month."

"There is an alternative," M. Binet said darkly.

"There is no alternative. Don't be a fool, Binet."

Binet sat up as if he had been prodded. Members of his company did not take this tone of direct rebuke with him.

"Anyway, I will make you a present of it," Scaramouche pursued airily. "Exercise it if you please. Step outside and inform the police that they can lay hands upon one André-Louis Moreau. But that will be the end of your fine dreams of going to Redon and playing in a real theater for the first time in your life. You can't do it without me, and you know it. I am not going to Redon or anywhere else. In fact, I am not even going to Fougeray until we have an equitable arrangement."

"But why so much heat?" Binet complained. "And all for what? Why must you assume that I have the soul of a usurer? When our little arrangement was made, I had no idea that you would prove so valuable to me. How could I? You only had to remind me, my dear Scaramouche. I am a just man. From today, you shall have thirty livres a month. See, I double it at once. I am a generous man."

"But you are not ambitious. Now listen to me for a moment."

He proceeded to unfold a scheme that filled Binet with paralyzing terror.

"After Redon, Nantes," he said. "Nantes and the Théâtre Feydau."

M. Binet choked in the act of drinking. The Théâtre Feydau was a sort of provincial Comédie Française. The great Fleury had played there to an audience as critical as any in France. The very thought of Redon gave Binet a cramp in the stomach, so dangerously ambitious did it seem to him. And Redon was a puppet show compared to Nantes. Yet this raw lad, whom he had picked up by chance three weeks ago, could talk of Nantes and the Théâtre Feydau without changing color. In that short time, the boy had blossomed from a country attorney into an author and actor.

"But why not Paris and the Comédie Française?" M. Binet wondered with sarcasm when he finally got his breath.

"That may come later," the impudent young man said.

"Eh? You've been drinking, my friend."

But André-Louis detailed the plan that had been forming in his mind. Fougeray would be a training ground for Redon, and Redon would be a training ground for Nantes. They would stay in Redon as long as people paid adequately to see them. Meanwhile, they would work hard to perfect themselves. They would add three or four new talented players to the company. He would write three or four fresh scenarios, which they would test and perfect until the troupe had at least half a dozen reliable plays. They would spend a portion of their profits on better dresses and scenery. Finally, in a couple of months, if all went well, they would be ready to make their real bid for fortune at Nantes. It was true that audiences usually demanded distinction from the companies appearing at the Feydau. On the other hand, Nantes had not seen a troupe of improvisers for over a generation. They would supply a novelty that all Nantes would flock to see, provided the work was done well. Scaramouche pledged that if matters were left in his hands, his revival of the Commedia dell' Arte in all its glories would exceed any expectations the public might have.

"We'll talk of Paris after Nantes," he finished supremely matter-of-factly. "Just as we will definitely decide on Nantes after Redon."

The persuasiveness that could sway a mob ended by sweeping M. Binet off his feet. The prospect Scaramouche unfolded was terrifying but also intoxicating. As Scaramouche delivered a crushing answer to each weakening objection, Binet ended by promising to think the matter over.

"Redon will point the way," André-Louis said. "And I don't doubt which way Redon will point."

Thus the great adventure of Redon dwindled to insignificance. Instead of a terrifying undertaking, it became merely a rehearsal for something greater. In his momentary exaltation, Binet proposed another bottle of Volnay. Scaramouche waited until the cork was drawn before continuing.

"The thing remains possible," he said casually, holding his glass to the light, "as long as I am with you."

"Agreed, my dear Scaramouche, agreed. Our chance meeting was a fortunate thing for both of us."

"For both of us," Scaramouche said with stress. "That is as I would have it. So I do not think you will surrender me to the police just yet."

"As if I could think of such a thing! My dear Scaramouche, you amuse yourself. I beg that you will never allude to that little joke of mine again."

"It is forgotten," André-Louis said. "And now for the remainder of my proposal. If I am to become the architect of your fortunes and build them as I have planned, I must also become the architect of my own."

"In the same degree?" M. Binet frowned.

"In the same degree. From today, if you please, we will conduct the affairs of this company in a proper manner, and we will keep account books."

"I am an artist," M. Binet said with pride. "I am not a merchant."

"There is a business side to your art, and that shall be conducted in a business manner. I have thought it all out for you. You shall not be troubled with details that might hinder the due exercise of your art. All you have to do is say yes or no to my proposal."

"Ah? And the proposal?"

"Is that you constitute me your partner, with an equal share in the profits of your company."

Pantaloon's great countenance grew pale. His little eyes widened to their fullest extent as he scanned his companion's face. Then he exploded.

"You are mad, of course, to make me such a monstrous proposal."

"It has its injustices, I admit. But I have provided for them. For instance, it would not be fair that, in addition to all I am proposing to do, I should also play Scaramouche and write your scenarios without any reward outside of my half-profit as a partner. Thus, before the profits are divided, a salary must be paid to me as an actor, and a small sum for each scenario I provide. That is a matter for mutual agreement. Similarly, you shall be paid a salary as Pantaloon. After clearing those expenses and all other salaries and disbursements, the residue is the profit to be divided equally between us."

It was not a proposal that M. Binet would swallow easily. He began with a point-blank refusal to consider it.

"In that case, my friend," Scaramouche said, "we part company at once. Tomorrow I shall bid you a reluctant farewell."

Binet fell to raging. He spoke of ingratitude with deep feeling. He even permitted himself another sly allusion to his little jest about the police, which he had promised never to mention again.

"As to that, you may do as you please. Play the informer, by all means. But consider that you will just as definitely be deprived of my services. Without me, you are nothing, just as you were before I joined your company."

M. Binet did not care about the consequences. A fig for the consequences! He would teach this impudent young country attorney that M. Binet was not a man to be imposed upon.

"Very well," Scaramouche said, rising with a mix of indifference and resignation. "As you wish. But before you act, sleep on the matter. In the cold light of morning, you may see our two proposals in their proper proportions. Mine spells fortune for both of us. Yours spells ruin for both of us. Good night, M. Binet. Heaven help you to a wise decision."

The decision M. Binet finally came to was naturally the only one possible in the face of André-Louis's firm resolve. Scaramouche held all the trumps. Of course, there were further discussions before everything was settled. M. Binet was brought to an agreement only after an infinity of haggling, which was surprising for someone who claimed to be an artist and not a businessman. André-Louis made one or two concessions. For instance, he consented to waive his claim to be paid for scenarios. He also agreed that M. Binet should appoint himself a salary entirely out of proportion to his merits.

Thus, the matter was settled in the end, and the announcement was duly made to the assembled company. There were, of course, jealousies and resentments. But these were not deep-seated. They were readily swallowed when everyone discovered that their lot would be materially improved with better salaries under the new arrangement. M. Binet had opposed this considerably, but the irresistible Scaramouche swept away all objections.

"If we are to play at the Feydau, you want a company of self-respecting comedians, not a pack of cringing starvelings. The better we pay them in reason, the more they will earn for us."

Thus, the company's resentment over the swift promotion of its latest recruit was conquered. Cheerfully now, with one exception, they accepted the dominance of Scaramouche. This dominance was soon so firmly established that M. Binet himself came under it.

The one exception was Climene. She had failed to bring this interesting young stranger to heel since he had literally dropped into their midst outside Guichen. This failure had begotten a malice in her, which his persistent ignoring of her had steadily inflamed. She had remonstrated with her father when the new partnership was first formed. She lost her temper and called him a fool. M. Binet, in Pantaloon's best manner, had lost his temper in return and boxed her ears. She piled it all onto Scaramouche's account and waited for her opportunity to pay off that ever-increasing score. But opportunities were few. Scaramouche was too occupied. During the week of preparation at Fougeray, he was hardly seen except at performances. Once they were at Redon, he came and went like the wind between the theater and the inn.

The Redon experiment justified itself from the first. Stimulated and encouraged, André-Louis worked day and night during the month they spent in that busy little town. The moment was well chosen, for the chestnut trade centered in Redon was at its height. Every afternoon, the little theater was packed with spectators. The troupe's fame had spread, borne by chestnut growers bringing their wares to the Redon market. The audiences consisted of people from the surrounding country and neighboring villages as far out as Allaire, Saint-Perrieux, and Saint-Nicholas. To keep business from slackening, André-Louis prepared a new scenario every week. He wrote three in addition to the two he had already supplied. These were "The Marriage of Pantaloon," "The Shy Lover," and "The Terrible Captain." The last was the greatest success. It was based on the "Miles Gloriosus" of Plautus, with great opportunities for Rhodomont and a good part for Scaramouche as the roaring captain's sly lieutenant. Its success was largely because André-Louis amplified the scenario, indicating very fully the lines the dialogue should follow. Here and there, he went so far as to supply actual dialogue to be spoken, without making it mandatory for the actors to stick to the letter.

Meanwhile, as business prospered, he became busy with tailors, improving the company's wardrobe, which sorely needed it. He tracked down a couple of needy artists and lured them into the company to play small parts, such as apothecaries and notaries. He set them to beguile their leisure time by painting new scenery so they would be ready for what he called the conquest of Nantes in the new year. Never in his life had he worked so hard. His fund of energy and enthusiasm was inexhaustible, like his good humor. He came and went, acted, wrote, conceived, directed, planned, and executed. Meanwhile, M. Binet took his ease in comparative affluence, drank Burgundy every night, ate white bread and delicacies. Congratulated himself on his astuteness in making this industrious fellow his partner. Having discovered how idle his fears of Redon had been, he now began to dismiss the terrors of Nantes.

His happiness was reflected throughout the company's ranks, always with the single exception of Climene. She had ceased to sneer at Scaramouche, realizing at last that her sneers left him untouched and recoiled upon herself. Thus, her almost indefinable resentment of him increased as it was stifled. At all costs, she had to find an outlet for it.

One day, she threw herself in his path as he was leaving the theater after the performance. The others had already gone, and she had returned under the pretense of having forgotten something.

"Will you tell me what I have done to you?" she asked point-blank.

"Done to me, mademoiselle?" He did not understand.

She made a gesture of impatience. "Why do you hate me?"

"Hate you, mademoiselle? I do not hate anybody. It is the most stupid of all emotions. I have never hated, not even my enemies."

"What Christian resignation!"

"As for hating you, of all people! Why, I consider you adorable. I envy Leander every day of my life. I have seriously thought of setting him to play Scaramouche so I could play lovers myself."

"I don't think you would be a success," she said.

"That is the only consideration restraining me. And yet, given the inspiration that Leander receives, it is possible that I might be convincing."

"Why, what inspiration do you mean?"

"The inspiration of playing to so adorable a Climene."

Her lazy eyes were now alert, searching his lean face.

"You are laughing at me," she said, and swept past him into the theater on her pretended quest. There was nothing to be done with such a fellow. He was utterly without feeling. He was not a man at all.

Yet when she came out again five minutes later, she found him still lingering at the door.

"Not gone yet?" she asked superciliously.

"I was waiting for you, mademoiselle. You will be walking to the inn. If I might escort you..."

"But what gallantry! What condescension!"

"Perhaps you would prefer that I did not?"

"How could I prefer that, M. Scaramouche? Besides, we are both going the same way, and the streets are common to all. It is just that I am overwhelmed by the unusual honor."

He looked into her piquant little face and noted how obscured it was by a cloud of dignity. He laughed.

"Perhaps I feared that the honor was not sought."

"Ah, now I understand," she cried. "It is for me to seek these honors. I am to woo a man before he will pay me the homage of civility. It must be so, since you, who clearly know everything, have said so. It remains for me to beg your pardon for my ignorance."

"It amuses you to be cruel," Scaramouche said. "No matter. Shall we walk?"

They set out together, stepping briskly to warm their blood against the wintry evening air. They walked in silence for a while, each furtively observing the other.

"And so, you find me cruel?" she challenged at length, betraying that the accusation had struck home.

He looked at her with a half-smile. "Will you deny it?"

"You are the first man who ever accused me of that."

"I dare not suppose myself the first man to whom you have been cruel. That would be an assumption too flattering to myself. I prefer to think that the others suffered in silence."

"Mon Dieu! Have you suffered?" She was caught between seriousness and mockery.

"I place the confession as an offering on the altar of your vanity."

"I should never have suspected it."

"How could you? Am I not what your father calls a natural actor? I was an actor long before I became Scaramouche. Therefore, I have laughed. I often laugh when I am hurt. When you were pleased to be disdainful, I acted disdain in turn."

"You acted very well," she said without reflecting.

"Of course. I am an excellent actor."

"And why this sudden change?"

"In response to the change in you. You have grown weary of your part of the cruel madam. It is a dull part, believe me, and unworthy of your talents. If I were a woman and had your loveliness and grace, Climene, I would disdain using them as weapons of offense."

"Loveliness and grace!" she echoed, feigning amused surprise. But the vain baggage was mollified. "When did you discover this beauty and grace, M. Scaramouche?"

He looked at her for a moment, considering her sprightly beauty and the adorable femininity that had irresistibly attracted him from the first.

"One morning when I beheld you rehearsing a love scene with Leander."

He caught the surprise that leaped into her eyes before she veiled them under drooping lids from his seeking gaze.

"Why, that was the first time you saw me."

"I had no earlier occasion to remark your charms."

"You ask me to believe too much," she said, but her tone was softer than he had ever heard it.

"Then you'll refuse to believe me if I confess that it was this grace and beauty that determined my destiny that day. It urged me to join your father's troupe."

At that, she became a little out of breath. There was no longer any question of finding an outlet for resentment. Resentment was completely forgotten.

"But why? With what object?"

"With the object of asking you one day to be my wife."

She halted under the shock of that statement and swung around to face him. Her glance met his without shyness now. There was a hardening glitter in her eyes and a faint stir of color in her cheeks. She suspected him of an unpardonable mockery.

"You go very fast, don't you?" she asked with heat.

"I do. Haven't you observed it? I am a man of sudden impulses. See what I have made of the Binet troupe in less than two months. Another might have labored for a year and not achieved half of it. Shall I be slower in love than in work? Would it be reasonable to expect that? I have curbed and repressed myself not to scare you with precipitancy. In doing so, I have done violence to my feelings, especially by using the same cold aloofness with which you chose to treat me. I have waited so patiently until you tired of that mood of cruelty."

"You are an amazing man," she said colorlessly.

"I am," he agreed. "Only the conviction that I am not commonplace has permitted me to hope as I have hoped."

Mechanically, and as if by tacit consent, they resumed their walk.

"And I ask you to observe," he said, "when you complain that I go very fast, that I have so far asked you for nothing."

"How?" she asked with a frown.

"I have merely told you of my hopes. I am not rash enough to ask at once whether I may realize them."

"My faith, but that is prudent," she said tartly.

"Of course."

It was his self-possession that exasperated her. After that, she walked the short remainder of the way in silence, and for the moment, the matter was left there.

But that night, after they had supped, it chanced that when Climene was about to retire, she and he were alone together. They were in the room above stairs that her father kept exclusively for his company. The Binet Troupe, you see, was rising in the world.

As Climene rose to withdraw for the night, Scaramouche rose with her to light her candle. Holding it in her left hand, she offered him her right. It was a long, tapering, white hand at the end of a softly rounded arm that was bare to the elbow.

"Good night, Scaramouche," she said. It was so soft and tender that he caught his breath and stood scanning her with glowing dark eyes.

They stood like that for a moment. Then he took the tips of her fingers in his grasp, bowed over the hand, and pressed his lips upon it. He looked at her again. Her intense femininity lured him, invited him, and surrendered to him. Her face was pale. There was a glitter in her eyes and a curious smile on her parted lips. Under her fichu-menteur, her bosom rose and fell, completing her betrayal.

Holding her hand, he drew her towards him. She came unresisting. He took the candle from her and set it down on the sideboard beside her. The next moment, her slight, lithe body was in his arms. He kissed her, murmuring her name as if it were a prayer.

"Am I cruel now?" she panted. He kissed her again as his only answer. "You made me cruel because you would not see," she whispered next.

And then the door opened, and M. Binet walked in. His paternal eyes were regaled by this highly indecorous behavior from his daughter.

He stood gazing while they quite leisurely detached from each other with a self-possession too complete to be natural.

"And what may be the meaning of this?" M. Binet demanded, bewildered and profoundly shocked.

"Does it require explaining?" Scaramouche asked. "Doesn't it speak for itself eloquently? It means that Climene and I have taken it into our heads to be married."

"And doesn't it matter what I may take into my head?"

"Of course. But you could have neither the bad taste nor the bad heart to offer any obstacle."

"You take that for granted? Aye, that is your way, to be sure, taking things for granted. But my daughter is not to be taken for granted. I have very definite views for my daughter. You have done an unworthy thing, Scaramouche. You have betrayed my trust in you. I am very angry with you."

He rolled forward with his ponderous yet curiously noiseless gait. Scaramouche turned to her, smiling, and handed her the candle.

"If you will leave us, Climene, I will ask your hand of your father in proper form."

She vanished, a little fluttered and lovelier than ever in her mixture of confusion and timidity. Scaramouche closed the door and faced the enraged M. Binet. Pantaloon had flung himself into an armchair at the head of the short table. Scaramouche faced him with the avowed purpose of asking for Climene's hand in proper form. And this was how he did it:

"Father-in-law," he said, "I congratulate you. This will certainly mean the Comédie Française for Climene before long, and you shall shine in the glory she reflects. As the father of Madame Scaramouche, you may yet be famous."

Binet glared at him in speechless stupefaction, his face slowly empurpling. His rage was more utter because of his humiliating conviction that whatever he might say or do, this irresistible fellow would bend him to his will. At last, speech returned to him.

"You're a damned corsair," he cried thickly, banging his ham-like fist upon the table. "A corsair! First you sail in and plunder me of half my legitimate gains. And now you want to carry off my daughter. But I'll be damned if I'll give her to a graceless, nameless scoundrel like you. The gallows are waiting for you already."

Scaramouche pulled the bell-rope, not discomposed at all. He smiled. There was a flush on his cheeks and a gleam in his eyes. He was very pleased with the world that night. He really owed a great debt to M. de Lesdiguières.

"Binet," he said, "forget for once that you are Pantaloon. Behave as a nice, amiable father-in-law should behave when he has secured a son-in-law of exceptional merits. We are going to have a bottle of Burgundy at my expense, and it shall be the best bottle of Burgundy found in Redon. Compose yourself to do fitting honor to it. Excitations of the bile invariably impair the fine sensitiveness of the palate."
