Chapter 17. The Dream

Aline commanded her footman to open the door. She then told André-Louis to get in beside her.

"A moment, Aline."

He turned to his companion. Climène was full of amazement. Harlequin and Columbine had just walked up to share her surprise. André-Louis spoke breathlessly. "Do you permit me, Climène?" His words sounded more like a statement than a question. "Fortunately you are not alone. Harlequin will take care of you. I will see you at dinner."

He sprang into the cabriolet without waiting for a reply. The footman closed the door. The coachman cracked his whip. The regal carriage rolled away along the quay. The three comedians stared after it in shock. Then Harlequin laughed.

"Our Scaramouche is a prince in disguise!" he said.

Columbine clapped her hands and smiled widely. "This is quite a romance for you, Climène! How wonderful!"

The frown melted from Climène's brow. Her resentment changed to bewilderment.

"But who is she?"

"She is his sister," Harlequin said confidently.

"His sister? How do you know?"

"I know what he will tell you when he returns."

"But why?"

"Because you would not believe him if he said she was his mother."

They watched the carriage leave and then wandered in the same direction. Aline sat in the carriage and studied André-Louis with grave eyes. Her lips were slightly compressed. A tiny frown formed between her finely drawn eyebrows.

"You have taken up with queer company, André," Aline said first. "Perhaps I am mistaken in thinking your companion was Mademoiselle Binet of the Feydeau Theatre."

"You are not mistaken. But I had not imagined Mademoiselle Binet was already so famous."

"Oh, as to that," Aline shrugged with a quiet scorn in her tone. She then explained. "I was simply at the play last night. I thought I recognized her."

"You were at the Feydeau last night? I never saw you!"

"Were you there too?"

"Was I there!" he cried. He then stopped and abruptly changed his tone. "Oh, yes, I was there," he said as casually as he could. He felt a sudden reluctance to admit that he had willingly stooped to a life she must consider unworthy. He felt grateful that his disguised face and voice had fooled even someone who knew him so well.

"I understand," Aline said. She compressed her lips a little more tightly.

"What do you understand?"

"I understand the rare attractions of Mademoiselle Binet. You would naturally be at the theatre. Your tone conveyed that very clearly. Do you know you disappoint me, André? Perhaps this is stupid of me. I suppose it betrays my imperfect knowledge of men. I know that most young men of fashion find stage women irresistibly attractive. But I did not expect you to copy the ways of a fashionable man. I was foolish enough to imagine you were different. I thought you were above such trivial pursuits. I considered you something of an idealist."

"That is sheer flattery."

"I see that now. But you misled me. You talked so much about morality and philosophy that I was deceived. In fact, your hypocrisy was so perfect that I never suspected it. You have such a gift for acting. I wonder why you have not joined Mademoiselle Binet's troupe."

"I have joined them," he said.

It had become necessary to tell her the truth. This was the lesser of the two evils she presented.

He saw incredulity, then consternation, and lastly disgust overspread her face.

"Of course," she said after a long pause. "That would bring you closer to your charmer."

"That was only one inducement. There was another reason. I found myself forced to choose between the stage and the gallows. I had the incredible weakness to prefer the stage. This choice was utterly unworthy of a man with my lofty ideals. But what can you expect? Like other idealists, I find it easier to preach than to practice. Shall I stop the carriage and remove my disgusting person? Or shall I tell you how it happened?"

"Tell me how it happened first. Then we will decide."

He told her how he met the Binet troupe. He explained how the mounted police forced him to hide among the actors until the pursuit died down. This explanation dissolved her icy attitude.

"My poor André, why did you not tell me this at first?"

"You did not give me time. I also feared shocking you with the spectacle of my degradation."

She took him seriously. "But why was this needed? Why did you not send word of your location like I asked?"

"I was only thinking of doing that yesterday. I hesitated for several reasons."

"Did you think we would be offended to know what you were doing?"

"I preferred to surprise you by the magnitude of my ultimate achievements."

"Oh, are you going to become a great actor?" She was frankly scornful.

"That is not impossible. But I am more concerned with becoming a great author. You have no reason to sneer. The calling is an honorable one. Everyone is proud to know men like Beaumarchais and Chénier."

"Do you hope to equal them?"

"I hope to surpass them. But I acknowledge that they taught me how to write. What did you think of the play last night?"

"It was amusing and well conceived."

"Let me introduce you to the author."

"You? But the company performs improvisations."

"Even improvisers need an author to write their scenarios. That is all I write at present. Soon I will be writing modern plays."

"You deceive yourself, my poor André. The piece last night would have been nothing without the actors. You are fortunate to have your Scaramouche."

"I can introduce you to him in confidence."

"Are you Scaramouche? You?" She turned to look fully at him. He smiled his close-lipped smile that created deep wrinkles in his cheeks. He nodded. "And I did not recognize you!"

"I thank you for the compliment. You naturally imagined I was a stagehand. Now you know everything about me. What about Gavrillac? How is my godfather?"

Aline told him that Gavrillac was well. He was still profoundly indignant with André-Louis for running away. But he was also secretly worried about him.

"I will write to him today and say I have seen you."

"Please do. Tell him I am well and prospering. But say no more than that. Do not tell him what I am doing. He has his prejudices too. Besides, it might not be wise. Now I must ask the question I have been burning to ask since I entered your carriage. Why are you in Nantes, Aline?"

"I am visiting my aunt, Madame de Sautron. I went to the play with her yesterday. We have been bored at the chateau, but things will change now. My aunt is receiving several guests today. Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr will be one of them."

André-Louis frowned and sighed. "Did you ever hear how poor Philippe de Vilmorin died?"

"Yes. My uncle told me first. Then Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr told me himself."

"Did that help you decide about this marriage?"

"How could it? You forget I am only a woman. You do not expect me to judge between men in such matters, do you?"

"Why not? You are well able to do so. You are especially capable since you have heard both sides. My godfather would tell you the truth. If you cannot judge, it means you do not want to judge." His tone became harsh. "You willfully close your eyes to justice because it might block your unhealthy and unnatural ambition."

"Excellent!" she exclaimed. She studied him with amusement and something else. "Do you know you are almost funny? You rise unblushing from the dregs of life where I found you. You shake off the arm of that theatre girl and then come to preach to me."

"I might still speak from the dregs of life to counsel you out of respect and devotion, Aline." He was very stiff and stern. "But these are not the dregs of life. Honor and virtue are possible for a theatre girl. But they are impossible for a lady who sells herself to satisfy her ambition. She barters herself in marriage for position, riches, and a great title."

She looked at him breathlessly. Anger turned her face pale. She reached for the carriage cord.

"I think I had better let you out. Then you can go back and practice virtue and honor with your theatre wench."

"You must not speak of her like that, Aline."

"Faith, now you get heated on her behalf. Do you think I am too delicate? Do you think I should speak of her as a..."

"If you must speak of her at all," he interrupted hotly, "you will speak of her as my wife."

Amazement smothered her anger. Her pallor deepened. "My God!" she said. She looked at him in horror. She presently asked him in horror, "Are you married to that woman?"

"Not yet. But I will be soon. Let me tell you something about this girl you treat with ignorant contempt. She is as good and pure as you are, Aline. She has wit and talent that have placed her where she is. These qualities will carry her much further. She also has the womanly sense to be guided by natural instincts when choosing a mate."

Aline trembled with passion. She pulled the cord.

"You will get out this instant!" she told him fiercely. "How dare you compare me to that..."

"To my future wife," he interrupted before she could speak the infamous word. He opened the door himself without waiting for the footman. He leaped down to the street. "Give my compliments to the assassin you are going to marry," he said furiously. He slammed the door. "Drive on," he ordered the coachman.

The carriage rolled away up the Faubourg Gigan. It left him standing in the street, quivering with rage. His anger gradually cooled as he walked back to the inn. He began to understand her point of view as he calmed down. He ultimately forgave her. It was not her fault she thought this way. Her upbringing had taught her to view every actress as a prostitute. Her background also conditioned her to calmly accept the monstrous arranged marriage she was offered.

He returned to the inn and found the company at the table. A sudden silence fell when he entered. This silence suggested he was the subject of their conversation. Harlequin and Columbine had spread the story of this disguised prince. They told how a princess had snatched him up into her carriage and taken him away. The tale had only grown more dramatic in the telling.

Climène had been silent and thoughtful. She pondered what Columbine had called her romance. Her Scaramouche must clearly be far more important than he had appeared. A great lady would never have acted so familiar with him otherwise. Climène had claimed him as her own when she thought he was a common man. Now she would receive the reward for her unselfish affection.

Even old Binet's secret hostility toward André-Louis melted after this shocking revelation. He pinched his daughter's ear playfully. "Ah, I trust you to have seen through his disguise, my child!"

She shrank back resentfully from his implication.

"But I did not. I took him for who he seemed."

Her father winked at her solemnly and laughed. "To be sure you did. But your father was once a gentleman and knows gentlemanly ways. Like me, you detected something subtle in him. This made him different from the people misfortune has forced you to live with. You knew he never learned that haughty attitude and grand air of command in a dusty law office. His speech hardly sounded like a common bourgeois. His thoughts were far too complex. It was smart of you to make him yours. I will be very proud of you yet, Climène."

She moved away without answering. Her father's oily manner offended her. Scaramouche was clearly a great gentleman. He might be eccentric, but he was high-born. And she would be his lady. Her father must learn to treat her differently.

She looked shyly at her lover when he entered the dining room. It was a new kind of shyness. She noticed his proud posture for the first time. His habit of thrusting his chin forward caught her eye. She also noticed his graceful movements. He moved like someone who had studied with dancing and fencing masters in his youth.

It almost hurt her when he dropped into a chair. He exchanged a joke with Harlequin in his usual equal manner. It offended her even more that Harlequin spoke to him with such inappropriate familiarity now that he knew the truth.
