Chapter 3. The Comic Muse

The company’s entrance into the town of Guichen was startling and noisy, leaving the local country people staring in shock. Binet had hoped for a triumphant arrival, but instead, they appeared to the locals as bizarre creatures from another world.

First came the large traveling carriage, creaking and groaning along the road, pulled by two Flemish horses. Pantaloon drove it. He was a large, heavy man dressed in a tight scarlet suit under a long brown gown, and he wore a huge cardboard nose. Beside him on the driver's box sat Pierrot. He wore a white smock with sleeves that covered his hands, loose white pants, and a black skull-cap. His face was painted white with flour, and he blew loud, harsh notes on a trumpet.

On the roof of the coach sat Polichinelle, Scaramouche, Harlequin, and Pasquariel. Polichinelle wore black and white clothing in an old-fashioned style, with padded humps on his chest and back. He had a white ruffle around his neck and a black mask over the top half of his face. He stood in the middle with his feet spread wide for balance, and he struck a large drum forcefully. The other three sat at the corners of the roof with their legs hanging over the edge. Scaramouche dressed entirely in black in a seventeenth-century Spanish style, wearing a fake mustache and playing a guitar loudly and out of tune. Harlequin wore ragged clothes patched with every color of the rainbow. He had a leather belt and a wooden sword, and the top half of his face was smeared with soot. He crashed a pair of cymbals together from time to time. Pasquariel dressed as a pharmacist with a skull-cap and a white apron. He made the crowd laugh by pumping a huge tin syringe that let out a sad squeak.

Inside the carriage, the three women of the company sat at the windows and joked with the townspeople. Climene, the leading lady, wore a beautiful flowered satin dress. She hid her natural curls under a round wig. She looked so much like a high-society lady that you might wonder what she was doing with this strange group. Madame, playing the mother, also dressed in grand clothes, but she exaggerated her outfit to look ridiculous. She wore a massive headpiece decorated with flowers and small ostrich feathers. Columbine sat facing them with her back to the horses. She pretended to be shy, wearing a white muslin milkmaid hat and a striped green and blue dress.

It was a miracle that the old carriage did not break down under their heavy and wild load. In its better days, it might have carried an important church official, but now it only groaned under the weight.

Behind the carriage came the house on wheels. It was led by the tall, thin Rhodomont. He had painted his face red and wore fierce, terrifying mustaches. He wore tall leather boots and a leather jacket, and he dragged a huge sword from a red shoulder belt. He wore a wide felt hat with a messy feather. As he walked, he shouted loudly, challenging everyone and threatening terrible violence. Leandre sat alone on the roof of this wagon. He wore a blue satin outfit with ruffles, a small sword, powdered hair, beauty patches, a small telescope, and red-heeled shoes. He looked like a handsome, perfect gentleman from the royal court. The women of Guichen flirted with him as he passed by. He accepted their attention as a natural reward for his good looks and flirted back with enthusiasm. Like Climene, he seemed completely out of place among the rough group of actors.

Andre-Louis walked at the very end of the parade, leading the two donkeys that pulled the supply cart. He had insisted on wearing a fake nose, claiming it was for the show, but he really wanted to hide his identity. He kept his normal clothes on for the rest of his outfit. No one paid any attention to him as he walked quietly beside his donkeys. He was happy to stay unnoticed at the back of the group.

The actors paraded around the town, which was already busy getting ready for the upcoming fair. They stopped every now and then, and the loud music would suddenly end. Then, Polichinelle would shout out in a booming voice that Mr. Binet's famous acting company would perform a new four-act comedy called "The Heartless Father" at five o'clock that evening in the old market.

Eventually, they arrived at the old market. It was located on the ground floor of the town hall. The building had large archways on all four sides, opening it up to the weather. Most of these archways had been closed off with wooden boards. Only two archways were left open for the audience to enter the makeshift theater. Through these two openings, poor townspeople and cheap locals could sneak a peek at the performance without paying for a ticket.

That afternoon was the hardest work Andre-Louis had ever done, because he was not used to manual labor. He spent the time helping to build and set up the stage at one end of the market hall. He quickly realized how difficult it would be to earn his salary of fifteen livres a month. At first, four men worked on the stage, but Pantaloon mostly just shouted orders. Rhodomont and Leandre took off their fine costumes and helped Andre-Louis build the stage. Meanwhile, the other four actors ate dinner with the women. About half an hour later, the others came to take over the work. Then Andre-Louis and his group went to eat, leaving Polichinelle to manage and help with the rest of the building.

They walked across the town square to the cheap little inn where they were staying. In the narrow hallway, Andre-Louis ran into Climene. She had taken off her fancy costume and was back in her normal clothes.

"And how do you like it?" she asked him boldly.

He looked her straight in the eyes. "It has its benefits," he replied. He spoke in his usual cold tone, which made it hard to tell if he meant what he said or not.

She frowned. "You feel you need benefits already?"

"I honestly felt I needed them from the start," he said. "The promise of those benefits is what convinced me to join."

They were completely alone in the hallway, as the others had already gone into the dining room where the food was waiting. Andre-Louis understood a lot about men, but very little about women. He suddenly felt very aware of her as a woman, and he did not realize that she was quietly causing him to feel this way.

"What are these benefits?" she asked, pretending to be completely innocent.

He caught himself just before making a mistake.

"Fifteen livres a month," he said quickly.

She stared at him in confusion for a moment. He was very hard to read. Then she recovered her confidence.

"Oh, and you get a bed and food," she said. "Don't forget to count those, because your dinner is getting cold. Aren't you coming in?"

"Haven't you eaten yet?" he asked, and she wondered if he sounded a little too eager.

"No," she answered, looking back over her shoulder. "I waited."

"What did you wait for?" he asked hopefully.

"I had to change my clothes, of course, you fool," she answered rudely. She felt she had trapped him and could not resist insulting him. But Andre-Louis was the kind of man who always fought back.

"And I see you left your good manners upstairs with your fancy clothes, miss. I understand," he said.

Her face turned bright red. "You are very rude," she said weakly.

"I have been told that often, but I don't believe it." He opened the door for her and bowed. It was a grand, impressive bow that he had copied from an actor at the Comedie Francaise theater in Paris during his school days. He waved her inside. "After you, my lady."

"Thank you, sir," she answered coldly. She sounded as close to sneering as a charming woman could be. She walked into the room and did not speak to him again for the entire meal. Instead, she spent all her time eagerly talking to Leandre. Poor Leandre could never act like a convincing lover on stage with her because he wanted so badly to be her lover in real life.

Andre-Louis still ate his fish and dark bread with a good appetite. The food was poor, but many people were starving that winter, and poor food was normal. Since he had joined a struggling acting company, he decided to accept the difficulties without complaining.

"Do you have a name?" Binet asked him during a quiet moment in the meal.

"It turns out that I do," he said. "I think it is Parvissimus."

"Parvissimus?" Binet asked. "Is that your family name?"

"In a company like this, only the boss gets to use a family name. It would be wrong for the lowest member to use one. So I have chosen a name that fits me best. I think Parvissimus is perfect, because it means the very least."

Binet found this funny. It was a clever joke. He felt sure that they would work well together on writing the new plays.

"I will enjoy writing much more than building stages," Andre-Louis said. However, he still had to go back to building that afternoon. He worked hard until four o'clock. Finally, the demanding Binet said he was happy with the stage. Binet then started setting up the lights, with Andre-Louis helping him again. The theater was lit by a mix of wax candles and lamps that burned fish oil.

At five o'clock that evening, someone knocked three times to signal the start, and the curtain opened on "The Heartless Father."

Andre-Louis took over the job of the theater doorkeeper, replacing a man named Felicien who had left the company. He wore his Polichinelle costume and fake nose while he collected the tickets. Binet and Andre-Louis were both happy with this setup. Binet kept Andre-Louis's regular clothes to make sure the new worker did not steal the ticket money and run away. Andre-Louis knew exactly what Binet was doing. He gladly agreed because the costume hid his face from anyone from his past who might be in Guichen.

The play was very boring, and the audience was small and quiet. There were only twenty-seven people sitting on the benches in the front half of the market. Eleven people paid twenty sous each, and sixteen people paid twelve sous. Behind them stood a rough crowd of about thirty people who paid six sous each. In total, the company made two louis, ten livres, and two sous. After Binet paid for renting the market, the lights. The company's hotel rooms for the weekend, there would barely be any money left to pay the actors. It made sense that Binet was not in a good mood that evening.

"And what did you think of the play?" Binet asked Andre-Louis as they walked back to the inn.

"It is possible that it could have been worse, but it is highly unlikely," he answered.

Binet stopped walking and stared at his companion in complete shock.

"What!" he gasped. "Good heavens! You are certainly honest."

"I know honesty is not popular when dealing with fools," Andre-Louis said.

"Well, I am not a fool," Binet said.

"That is exactly why I am being honest. I am giving you the compliment of assuming you are an intelligent man, Mr. Binet."

"Oh, you are?" Binet snapped. "And who do you think you are to assume anything? You are acting too arrogant, sir." Binet stopped talking and went back to sadly calculating his money in his head.

But half an hour later at dinner, Binet brought the subject up again.

"Our newest member, the wonderful Mr. Parvissimus," Binet announced to the group, "had the nerve to tell me that our comedy could possibly have been worse. Probably could not." Binet puffed out his fat cheeks, expecting everyone to laugh at the foolish new worker.

"That is bad," said the dark and sarcastic Polichinelle. He looked as serious as a judge. "That is bad. But what is much worse is that the audience seemed to agree with him."

"They are just a bunch of uneducated peasants," Leandre sneered, tossing his handsome head.

"You are wrong," Harlequin told him. "You were born to be a lover, my friend, not a critic."

Leandre was a bit foolish, and he looked down at the small man with disgust. "And what were you born for?" he asked.

"Nobody knows," Harlequin admitted honestly. "And nobody knows why I was born, either. That is true for many of us, my friend."

"But why," Binet interrupted, stopping the argument before it could start, "why do you say Leandre is wrong?"

"Generally speaking, because he is always wrong. But specifically, because I think the audience in Guichen is too smart and modern for a play like 'The Heartless Father.'"

"It would sound better," interrupted Andre-Louis, who had started the whole debate, "if you said that 'The Heartless Father' is too simple and old-fashioned for the audience in Guichen."

"Why, what is the difference?" Leandre asked.

"I didn't say there was a difference in meaning. I just suggested it was a better way to explain the situation."

"The gentleman is trying to be clever," Binet sneered.

"Why is it a better way to explain it?" Harlequin asked.

"Because it is much easier to update 'The Heartless Father' to match the smart audience in Guichen, than it is to make the Guichen audience dumb enough to enjoy 'The Heartless Father.'"

"Let me think about that," Polichinelle groaned, holding his head in his hands.

At the far end of the table, Climene spoke up. She was sitting between Columbine and Madame.

"So you would change the comedy, would you, Mr. Parvissimus?" she asked sharply.

He turned to answer her mean comment.

"I would suggest that it should be changed," he corrected her, bowing his head slightly.

"And how exactly would you change it, sir?"

"Me? Oh, I would change it for the better."

"Of course you would!" She smiled with smooth sarcasm. "And how would you do that?"

"Yes, tell us!" Binet shouted loudly, and then added, "Quiet, please, ladies and gentlemen. Quiet for Mr. Parvissimus."

Andre-Louis looked from Binet to Climene and smiled. "Goodness!" he said. "I am trapped between a club and a knife. If I make it out of this alive, I will be lucky. Well, since you are forcing me to answer, I will tell you what I would do. I would go back to the original play and borrow more ideas from it."

"The original play?" asked Binet, who was supposed to be the author.

"I believe it is called 'Monsieur de Pourceaugnac,' and it was written by the famous Moliere."

Someone at the table giggled, but it was certainly not Binet. His feelings were badly hurt, and his small eyes showed that he was not the friendly man he pretended to be.

"You are accusing me of stealing," he said finally. "You are saying I stole Moliere's ideas."

"There is always the chance," Andre-Louis said calmly, "that two brilliant minds just happened to come up with the exact same ideas independently."

Binet stared closely at the young man for a moment. Andre-Louis looked completely calm and unbothered, so Binet decided to force him to answer clearly.

"So you are not saying that I have been stealing from Moliere?"

"I am actually advising you to start stealing from him, sir," Andre-Louis replied smoothly.

Binet was horrified.

"You are advising me to do that! You are telling me, Antoine Binet, to become a thief at my age!"

"He is being incredibly rude," Climene said angrily.

"Rude is the perfect word. Thank you for that, my dear. I trusted you, sir. You sit at my table, you have the honor of working in my company. You have the nerve to sit right to my face and tell me to become a thief! And not just any thief, but the worst kind of thief, a thief who steals ideas! This is unacceptable and insulting! I am afraid I have misjudged you, sir, just as you have misjudged me. I am not the criminal you think I am, sir. I refuse to keep a man in my company who suggests I should become one. This is absolutely outrageous!"

He was furious. His loud voice echoed through the small room. The rest of the actors sat quietly, looking a bit frightened. They all stared at Andre-Louis, who was the only person not bothered by Binet's angry speech.

"Do you realize, sir," Andre-Louis said very quietly, "that you are insulting the memory of a brilliant dead man?"

"What?" Binet asked.

Andre-Louis began to twist his clever argument.

"You are insulting the memory of Moliere, the greatest star of our stage and one of the greatest writers in our country. You are insulting him when you say it is evil to do exactly what he always did. No great writer has ever hesitated to borrow ideas. You surely don't think Moliere ever worried about being completely original. You don't think the stories in his plays were entirely new, do you? They were borrowed, as you very well know, even though you seem to have forgotten it right now. They were borrowed from old Italian writers, who probably borrowed them from someone else entirely. Moliere took those old stories and retold them using his own beautiful language. That is exactly what I am suggesting you should do. Your group is a company of improvisers. You make up the lines as you act, which is much more than Moliere ever tried to do. If you really want to, you could go straight to the older writers like Boccaccio or Sacchetti. But even then, you wouldn't know for sure if you had reached the true original story."

Andre-Louis won the argument easily. He was a master at debating, and he could make the wrong side look right. The actors were impressed, especially Binet. Binet realized that Andre-Louis had just given him a perfect excuse to use against anyone who might accuse him of stealing plays in the future. Binet quickly backed down from his anger.

"So you think," Binet said after agreeing with everything Andre-Louis had said, "you think that our story of 'The Heartless Father' could be improved by borrowing from 'Monsieur de Pourceaugnac'? Now that I think about it, the two plays might be a little bit similar."

"I do. I definitely do, as long as you borrow the ideas carefully. Things have changed a lot since Moliere's time." Because of this conversation, Binet left the table soon after and took Andre-Louis with him. The two men stayed up late that night working together, and they spent the entire Sunday morning locked in a room writing.

After dinner, Binet read the new, improved outline of "The Heartless Father" to the actors. Binet claimed he had worked very hard on it with the advice of Mr. Parvissimus. The actors suspected who really wrote it before Binet even started reading, and they were completely sure after he finished. The new story had great energy and excitement. The actors who knew Moliere's work realized that this new version was actually very different from Moliere's original play. The original main character, which Polichinelle played, was now very small and unimportant. Polichinelle was very upset about this. However, all the other characters had become much more important, except for Leandre, whose part stayed the same. The two biggest roles were now Scaramouche, who played a clever trickster named Sbrigandini, and Pantaloon, who played the father. There was also a funny new part for Rhodomont, who played a loud, bragging bully hired by Polichinelle to beat up Leandre. Because Scaramouche was now so important, the play was renamed "Figaro-Scaramouche."

Binet had fought hard against the new title. But his strict new writing partner, who was using his huge knowledge of books, had forced Binet to agree.

"You have to stay current with the times, sir," Andre-Louis had told him. "In Paris, the writer Beaumarchais is incredibly popular. The character 'Figaro' is famous all over the world right now. We should borrow some of his fame. It will attract a big audience. People will come to see a play with 'Figaro' in the title, even if they wouldn't come to see a dozen plays called 'The Heartless Father.' So let's give the character of Figaro to one of our actors and put his name in the title."

"But since I am the boss of the company..." Binet had started to argue weakly.

"If you choose to ignore what is best for your business, you will soon be a boss with no money and no company. What good is that? Can the character of Pantaloon really act like the clever Figaro? You are laughing. Of course you are, because the idea is silly. The only character who can act like Figaro is Scaramouche, because they are basically identical twins."

Binet finally gave in to his bossy new writer. Binet felt better when he realized that, as a theater expert, he had just bought a play for fifteen livres a month that would soon make him a lot of gold coins.

The actors' reaction to the new play proved that Binet had made the right choice. Everyone liked it except Polichinelle. He was angry because his role was much smaller now, so he complained that the new story was stupid.

"Ah! So you think my work is stupid, do you?" Binet yelled at him.

"Your work?" Polichinelle asked, clearly mocking him. "Ah, I am sorry. I didn't realize you were the true author."

"Well, realize it now."

"You and Mr. Parvissimus were working very closely together on this writing," Polichinelle said, hinting at the truth.

"And what if we were? What are you trying to say?"

"I am saying you just brought him in to sharpen your pencils, of course."

"I will cut your ears off if you don't show some respect!" the furious Binet screamed.

Polichinelle stood up slowly and stretched.

"Good heavens!" he said. "If Pantaloon is going to start acting like Rhodomont the bully, I think I will just leave." He walked out of the room confidently before Binet could even think of something to say.
