Chapter 10. CONTRITION

Mademoiselle de Kercadiou walked with her aunt in the bright morning sunshine of a Sunday in March on the broad terrace of the Chateau de Sautron.

Because of her naturally sweet disposition, she had been oddly irritable lately. She showed signs of a cynical worldliness, which convinced Madame de Sautron more than ever that her brother Quintin had scandalously mishandled the girl's education. Aline seemed to know about all the things a girl should not know, and she seemed ignorant of all the things a girl should know. That, at least, was Madame de Sautron's perspective.

"Tell me, Madame," Aline asked, "are all men beasts?" Unlike her brother, the Countess was tall and majestically built. In the days before her marriage to Monsieur de Sautron, cruel people described her as the only man in the family. She now looked down from her noble height at her little niece with startled eyes.

"Really, Aline, you have a habit of asking the most unsettling and improper questions."

"Perhaps it is because I find life unsettling and improper."

"Life? A young girl should not discuss life."

"Why not, since I am alive? You do not suggest that it is inappropriate to be alive, do you?"

"It is inappropriate for a young unmarried girl to try to know too much about life. As for your absurd question about men, perhaps you will consider yourself answered when I remind you that man is the noblest work of God."

Madame de Sautron did not want to continue the subject. But Mademoiselle de Kercadiou's outrageous upbringing had made her stubborn.

"If that is true," Aline said, "will you tell me why they find such an overwhelming attraction in the immodest women of our sex?"

Madame stood still and raised her shocked hands. She then looked down her handsome, high-bridged nose.

"Sometimes, and often in fact, my dear Aline, you are beyond all understanding. I shall write to Quintin and tell him that the sooner you are married, the better it will be for everyone."

"Uncle Quintin has left that matter for me to decide," Aline reminded her.

"That is the latest and most outrageous of his mistakes," Madame said with complete conviction. "Who has ever heard of a girl being allowed to decide the matter of her own marriage? It is almost indecent to expose her to thoughts of such things." Madame de Sautron shuddered. "Quintin is an uncouth man. His behavior is unheard of. It is disgraceful that Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr should have to parade himself before you so you can decide if he is the right man for you." She shuddered again. "It is incredibly vulgar and almost perverse. Good heavens! All of this was arranged between our parents when I married your uncle. I first saw him when he came to sign the marriage contract. I would have died of shame if it had happened any other way. That is exactly how these matters should be handled."

"You are undoubtedly right, Madame. But since my own case is not being handled that way, you must forgive me if I deal with it differently. Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr wants to marry me. He has been allowed to court me. I would appreciate it if you told him to stop doing so."

Madame de Sautron stood still. She was frozen by amazement. Her long face turned white, and she seemed to breathe with difficulty.

"But what are you saying?" she gasped.

Aline quietly repeated her statement.

"But this is outrageous! You cannot be allowed to play games with a gentleman of the Marquis's status! It has barely been a week since you allowed him to be told that you would become his wife!"

"I did so in a moment of rashness. The Marquis's own behavior has convinced me of my mistake since then."

"But good heavens!" the Countess cried. "Are you blind to the great honor he is paying you? The Marquis will make you the most important lady in Brittany. Yet you play games with this extraordinary good fortune, like the little fool you are, and the greater fool that Quintin is! Let me warn you." She raised a warning finger. "If you continue in this stupid mood, Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr might permanently withdraw his offer and leave in justified humiliation."

"That is exactly what I want, Madame, as I am trying to explain to you."

"Oh, you are crazy."

"I might actually be sensible for choosing to trust my instincts. I might even be justified in feeling angry that the man who wants to be my husband is also paying such close attention to a wretched theater girl at the Feydau."

"Aline!"

"Is it not true? Or perhaps you do not find it strange that Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr behaves this way at a time like this?"

"Aline, you are such a strange contradiction. You shock me with your indecent expressions one moment, and then you amaze me with your extreme prudishness the next. I think you have been raised like a little commoner. Yes, that is it. You are a little commoner. Quintin always had the heart of a shopkeeper."

"I was asking for your opinion on the behavior of Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr, Madame. I was not asking about my own."

"But it is inappropriate for you to notice such things. You should be ignorant of them, and I cannot imagine who is so cruel as to tell you. But since you do know, you should at least politely ignore the things that happen outside the world of a properly raised young lady."

"Will those things still be outside my world when I am married?"

"They will be if you are smart. You should stay ignorant of them. This knowledge ruins your innocence. I would not want Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr to know you are so highly informed for anything in the world. This never would have happened to you if you had been properly raised in a convent."

"But you are not answering me, Madame!" Aline cried in despair. "My purity is not the issue. We are talking about the purity of Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr."

"Purity!" Madame's lips trembled with horror. A look of horror spread across her face. "Wherever did you learn such a terrible and improper word?"

Madame de Sautron then forced herself to calm down. She realized she needed to be very calm and careful here. "My child, since you know so much that you should not know, there is no harm in adding that a gentleman must have these little distractions."

"But why, Madame? Why is it like that?"

"Ah, good heavens, you are asking me the riddles of nature. It is like that because it is like that. It is because men are like that."

"You mean because men are beasts, which is what I asked you in the first place."

"You are impossibly stubborn, Aline."

"You simply mean that I do not see things the way you do, Madame. I am not expecting too much, as you seem to think. But surely I have the right to expect that Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr will not be wooing a cheap theater girl at the same time he is wooing me. I feel like this secretly connects me with that unspeakable woman, and it soils and insults me. The Marquis is a boring man whose courtship consists of stiff, stupid, and unoriginal compliments. Those compliments do not improve when they come from lips that are still warm from the contamination of that woman's kisses."

Madame was so completely scandalized that she remained speechless for a moment. Then she spoke.

"Good heavens!" she exclaimed. "I never would have suspected you of having such a vulgar imagination."

"I cannot help it, Madame. Every time his lips touch my fingers, I find myself thinking about the last thing they touched. I immediately go to wash my hands. Unless you are kind enough to deliver my message to him, Madame, I will call for water and wash my hands right in front of him the next time he does it."

"But what am I supposed to tell him? How can I deliver such a message, and what words should I use?" Madame was horrified.

"Be honest with him, Madame. It is the easiest way in the end. Tell him that he must practice purity when he approaches a pure and spotless virgin for marriage, no matter how impure his past life has been or how impure he plans his future life to be."

Madame stepped back and covered her ears. Horror was clear on her handsome face. Her large chest heaved.

"Oh, how can you?" she gasped. "How can you use such terrible words? Wherever did you learn them?"

"In church," Aline said.

"Ah, but people say many things in church that they would never dream of saying in normal society. My dear child, how could I possibly say such a thing to the Marquis? How could I?"

"Should I say it myself?"

"Aline!"

"Well, there is the problem," Aline said. "Someone must do something to protect me from this insult. I am completely disgusted with the Marquis, because he is a disgusting man. I would honestly rather marry a decent shoemaker, no matter how wonderful it might be to become the Marquise de La Tour d'Azyr."

Aline was so intense and clearly determined that Madame de Sautron pulled herself out of her despair and tried to persuade her. Aline was her niece, and a marriage like this would bring honor to the whole family. Nothing could be allowed to ruin it at any cost.

"Listen, my dear," she said. "Let us be reasonable. The Marquis is away and will not return until tomorrow."

"That is true. And I know where he has gone, or at least who he has gone with. Good heavens, that cheap girl has a father and a foolish boyfriend who wants to marry her. Neither of them choose to do anything about it. I suppose they agree with you, Madame, that a great gentleman must have his little distractions." Her contempt was as burning as fire. "However, Madame, what were you about to say?"

"I was going to say that you are returning to Gavrillac the day after tomorrow. Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr will most likely follow you whenever he is ready."

"You mean when he is done with this dirty little affair?"

"Call it whatever you want." Madame had clearly given up on controlling her niece's improper language. "This Mademoiselle Binet will not be at Gavrillac. This entire situation will be in the past. It is unlucky that he met her at a time like this. The girl is very attractive, after all. You cannot deny that, and you must make allowances for him."

"The Marquis formally proposed to me a week ago. I gave him my consent, partly to satisfy the wishes of the family. Partly for another reason." She paused for a moment and then continued with a tone of dull pain. "Partly because it does not seem to matter very much who I marry. I now want to permanently withdraw that consent for the reasons I have given you, Madame."

Madame became wildly agitated. "Aline, I would never forgive you! Your Uncle Quintin would be devastated. You do not know what you are saying or what a wonderful opportunity you are rejecting. Do you have any sense of your social position or the class into which you were born?"

"If I did not have that sense, Madame, I would have ended this long ago. I have only tolerated this courtship because I understand the importance of making a suitable marriage in the eyes of society. But I want something more out of marriage, and Uncle Quintin has left the decision to me."

"May God forgive him!" Madame said. She then hurried on. "Leave this to me now, Aline. Please let me guide you in this." Her tone was begging. "I will discuss this with your Uncle Charles. But do not make a final decision until this unfortunate situation has blown over. Charles will know how to handle it. The Marquis will apologize and make amends, child, since your strictness requires it. But he will not suffer too harshly. Surely you will not ask for that much?"

Aline shrugged. "I am not asking for anything at all," she said, which was neither a yes nor a no.

Madame de Sautron then spoke with her husband. He was a slim, middle-aged man with a very aristocratic appearance and a good amount of practical common sense. She used the exact same tone with him that Aline had used with her, which she had found so uncomfortably vulgar in Aline. She even borrowed several of Aline's phrases.

The result was that the Count de Sautron met Monsieur de La Tour d'Azyr when his carriage finally arrived at the chateau on Monday afternoon. The Count wanted to speak with him before he even had a chance to change his clothes.

"Gervais, you are a fool," the Count began perfectly.

"Charles, you are not telling me anything new," the Marquis answered. "Which specific foolish act are you complaining about?"

He threw himself tiredly onto a sofa. He sprawled his long, graceful body there and looked up at his friend with a tired smile on his pale, handsome face, which seemed to resist the effects of aging.

"I am complaining about your latest act. This Binet girl."

"Oh, that! It is just a minor incident, hardly a foolish act."

"It is a foolish act at a time like this," Sautron insisted. The Marquis looked at him with a question in his eyes. The Count answered it. "It is Aline," he said meaningfully. "She knows. I cannot tell you how she knows, but she does know, and she is deeply offended."

The smile vanished from the Marquis's face. He sat up quickly.

"Offended?" he asked, and his voice sounded worried.

"Yes, absolutely. You know how she is. You know the ideals she believes in. It hurts her that you are pursuing this affair with that young Binet girl at the very time you are here trying to win her heart."

"How do you know this?" La Tour d'Azyr asked.

"She told her aunt everything in secret. And the poor child seems to have a valid point. She says she will not allow you to come and kiss her hand with lips that are still dirty from another woman. Oh, you understand what I mean. You realize how something like this affects a pure, sensitive girl like Aline. I should tell you what she said. She said that the next time you kiss her hand, she will call for water and wash her hand right in front of you."

The Marquis's face turned bright red. He stood up. Monsieur de Sautron was prepared for an angry outburst, knowing his friend's violent and intolerant temper. But no outburst happened. The Marquis turned away from him and walked slowly to the window. He kept his head bowed and his hands behind his back. He stopped there and spoke without turning around. His voice was both mocking and full of regret.

"You are right, Charles, I am a fool. I am a wicked fool! I have just enough sense left to realize it. I suppose it is because of the way I have lived my life. I have never had to deny myself anything I wanted." He suddenly turned around, and the outburst finally came. "But good God, I want Aline more than I have ever wanted anything! I think I would kill myself in anger if I lost her because of my own stupidity." He hit his forehead with his hand. "I am a beast!" he said. "I should have known that sweet saint would hate me if she found out about my petty, evil actions. I tell you, Charles, I would walk through fire to win back her respect."

"I hope you can win it back on easier terms," Charles said. He then made a weak joke to lighten the mood, which was becoming uncomfortably serious. "You only need to avoid walking through certain fires that Mademoiselle does not consider very purifying."

"That situation with the Binet girl is completely finished," the Marquis said.

"I congratulate you. When did you make that choice?"

"I made it right this second. I wish to God I had made it twenty-four hours ago. As it is now, twenty-four hours with her was enough for me, just as it would have been for any man." He shrugged. "She is a greedy, selfish little brat with the soul of a cheap woman. Disgusting!" He sh shivering with disgust for himself and for her.

"Ah! That certainly makes things easier for you," Monsieur de Sautron said sarcastically.

"Do not say that, Charles. It is not true. If you had been less of a fool yourself, you would have warned me sooner."

"I might have warned you soon enough if you actually learn from the warning."

"I will do any punishment required. I will throw myself at her feet. I will humble myself before her. I will confess my wrongs with true regret. With Heaven's help, I will stick to my promise to be a better man for her sweet sake." He was tragically serious.

This was a shocking revelation to Monsieur de Sautron, who had never seen the Marquis act anything other than calm, arrogant, and mocking. He almost backed away from it. It gave him the feeling that he was spying on someone through a keyhole. He patted his friend on the shoulder.

"My dear Gervais, this is a wonderfully romantic mood. We have said enough. Keep that attitude, and I promise you that everything will soon be fine. I will act as your messenger, and you will have no reason to complain."

"But can I not go and see her myself?"

"You will stay out of sight right now if you are smart. You can write to her if you want, and make your apology in a letter. I will explain why you left without seeing her. I will tell her you did it because of my advice, and I will handle it carefully. I am a good diplomat, Gervais. Trust me."

The Marquis raised his head, revealing a face deeply marked by pain. He reached out his hand. "Very well, Charles. Help me with this, and consider me your friend in all things."
