CHAPTER VIII. THE DREAM

“The door,” Aline commanded her footman, and “Mount here beside me,” she
commanded Andre-Louis, in the same breath.

“A moment, Aline.”

He turned to his companion, who was all amazement, and to Harlequin
and Columbine, who had that moment come up to share it. “You permit
me, Climene?” said he, breathlessly. But it was more a statement than
a question. “Fortunately you are not alone. Harlequin will take care of
you. Au revoir, at dinner.”

With that he sprang into the cabriolet without waiting for a reply. The
footman closed the door, the coachman cracked his whip, and the regal
equipage rolled away along the quay, leaving the three comedians staring
after it, open-mouthed... Then Harlequin laughed.

“A prince in disguise, our Scaramouche!” said he.

Columbine clapped her hands and flashed her strong teeth. “But what a
romance for you, Climene! How wonderful!”

The frown melted from Climene’s brow. Resentment changed to
bewilderment.

“But who is she?”

“His sister, of course,” said Harlequin, quite definitely.

“His sister? How do you know?”

“I know what he will tell you on his return.”

“But why?”

“Because you wouldn’t believe him if he said she was his mother.”

Following the carriage with their glance, they wandered on in the
direction it had taken. And in the carriage Aline was considering
Andre-Louis with grave eyes, lips slightly compressed, and a tiny frown
between her finely drawn eyebrows.

“You have taken to queer company, Andre,” was the first thing she said
to him. “Or else I am mistaken in thinking that your companion was Mlle.
Binet of the Theatre Feydau.”

“You are not mistaken. But I had not imagined Mlle. Binet so famous
already.”

“Oh, as to that...” mademoiselle shrugged, her tone quietly scornful.
And she explained. “It is simply that I was at the play last night. I
thought I recognized her.”

“You were at the Feydau last night? And I never saw you!”

“Were you there, too?”

“Was I there!” he cried. Then he checked, and abruptly changed his tone.
“Oh, yes, I was there,” he said, as commonplace as he could, beset by a
sudden reluctance to avow that he had so willingly descended to depths
that she must account unworthy, and grateful that his disguise of face
and voice should have proved impenetrable even to one who knew him so
very well.

“I understand,” said she, and compressed her lips a little more tightly.

“But what do you understand?”

“The rare attractions of Mlle. Binet. Naturally you would be at the
theatre. Your tone conveyed it very clearly. Do you know that you
disappoint me, Andre? It is stupid of me, perhaps; it betrays, I
suppose, my imperfect knowledge of your sex. I am aware that most young
men of fashion find an irresistible attraction for creatures who parade
themselves upon the stage. But I did not expect you to ape the ways of
a man of fashion. I was foolish enough to imagine you to be different;
rather above such trivial pursuits. I conceived you something of an
idealist.”

“Sheer flattery.”

“So I perceive. But you misled me. You talked so much morality of a
kind, you made philosophy so readily, that I came to be deceived. In
fact, your hypocrisy was so consummate that I never suspected it. With
your gift of acting I wonder that you haven’t joined Mlle. Binet’s
troupe.”

“I have,” said he.

It had really become necessary to tell her, making choice of the lesser
of the two evils with which she confronted him.

He saw first incredulity, then consternation, and lastly disgust
overspread her face.

“Of course,” said she, after a long pause, “that would have the
advantage of bringing you closer to your charmer.”

“That was only one of the inducements. There was another. Finding myself
forced to choose between the stage and the gallows, I had the incredible
weakness to prefer the former. It was utterly unworthy of a man of my
lofty ideals, but--what would you? Like other ideologists, I find it
easier to preach than to practise. Shall I stop the carriage and remove
the contamination of my disgusting person? Or shall I tell you how it
happened?”

“Tell me how it happened first. Then we will decide.”

He told her how he met the Binet Troupe, and how the men of the
marechaussee forced upon him the discovery that in its bosom he could
lie safely lost until the hue and cry had died down. The explanation
dissolved her iciness.

“My poor Andre, why didn’t you tell me this at first?”

“For one thing, you didn’t give me time; for another, I feared to shock
you with the spectacle of my degradation.”

She took him seriously. “But where was the need of it? And why did you
not send us word as I required you of your whereabouts?”

“I was thinking of it only yesterday. I have hesitated for several
reasons.”

“You thought it would offend us to know what you were doing?”

“I think that I preferred to surprise you by the magnitude of my
ultimate achievements.”

“Oh, you are to become a great actor?” She was frankly scornful.

“That is not impossible. But I am more concerned to become a great
author. There is no reason why you should sniff. The calling is an
honourable one. All the world is proud to know such men as Beaumarchais
and Chenier.”

“And you hope to equal them?”

“I hope to surpass them, whilst acknowledging that it was they who
taught me how to walk. What did you think of the play last night?”

“It was amusing and well conceived.”

“Let me present you to the author.”

“You? But the company is one of the improvisers.”

“Even improvisers require an author to write their scenarios. That is
all I write at present. Soon I shall be writing plays in the modern
manner.”

“You deceive yourself, my poor Andre. The piece last night would
have been nothing without the players. You are fortunate in your
Scaramouche.”

“In confidence--I present you to him.”

“You--Scaramouche? You?” She turned to regard him fully. He smiled his
close-lipped smile that made wrinkles like gashes in his cheeks. He
nodded. “And I didn’t recognize you!”

“I thank you for the tribute. You imagined, of course, that I was a
scene-shifter. And now that you know all about me, what of Gavrillac?
What of my godfather?”

He was well, she told him, and still profoundly indignant with
Andre-Louis for his defection, whilst secretly concerned on his behalf.

“I shall write to him to-day that I have seen you.”

“Do so. Tell him that I am well and prospering. But say no more. Do not
tell him what I am doing. He has his prejudices too. Besides, it might
not be prudent. And now the question I have been burning to ask ever
since I entered your carriage. Why are you in Nantes, Aline?”

“I am on a visit to my aunt, Mme. de Sautron. It was with her that I
came to the play yesterday. We have been dull at the chateau; but
it will be different now. Madame my aunt is receiving several guests
to-day. M. de La Tour d’Azyr is to be one of them.”

Andre-Louis frowned and sighed. “Did you ever hear, Aline, how poor
Philippe de Vilmorin came by his end?”

“Yes; I was told, first by my uncle; then by M. de La Tour d’Azyr,
himself.”

“Did not that help you to decide this marriage question?”

“How could it? You forget that I am but a woman. You don’t expect me to
judge between men in matters such as these?”

“Why not? You are well able to do so. The more since you have heard two
sides. For my godfather would tell you the truth. If you cannot judge,
it is that you do not wish to judge.” His tone became harsh. “Wilfully
you close your eyes to justice that might check the course of your
unhealthy, unnatural ambition.”

“Excellent!” she exclaimed, and considered him with amusement and
something else. “Do you know that you are almost droll? You rise
unblushing from the dregs of life in which I find you, and shake off the
arm of that theatre girl, to come and preach to me.”

“If these were the dregs of life I might still speak from them to
counsel you out of my respect and devotion, Aline.” He was very, stiff
and stern. “But they are not the dregs of life. Honour and virtue are
possible to a theatre girl; they are impossible to a lady who sells
herself to gratify ambition; who for position, riches, and a great title
barters herself in marriage.”

She looked at him breathlessly. Anger turned her pale. She reached for
the cord.

“I think I had better let you alight so that you may go back to practise
virtue and honour with your theatre wench.”

“You shall not speak so of her, Aline.”

“Faith, now we are to have heat on her behalf. You think I am too
delicate? You think I should speak of her as a...”

“If you must speak of her at all,” he interrupted, hotly, “you’ll speak
of her as my wife.”

Amazement smothered her anger. Her pallor deepened. “My God!” she said,
and looked at him in horror. And in horror she asked him presently: “You
are married--married to that--?”

“Not yet. But I shall be, soon. And let me tell you that this girl whom
you visit with your ignorant contempt is as good and pure as you are,
Aline. She has wit and talent which have placed her where she is and
shall carry her a deal farther. And she has the womanliness to be guided
by natural instincts in the selection of her mate.”

She was trembling with passion. She tugged the cord.

“You will descend this instant!” she told him fiercely. “That you should
dare to make a comparison between me and that...”

“And my wife-to-be,” he interrupted, before she could speak the infamous
word. He opened the door for himself without waiting for the footman,
and leapt down. “My compliments,” said he, furiously, “to the assassin
you are to marry.” He slammed the door. “Drive on,” he bade the
coachman.

The carriage rolled away up the Faubourg Gigan, leaving him standing
where he had alighted, quivering with rage. Gradually, as he walked back
to the inn, his anger cooled. Gradually, as he cooled, he perceived her
point of view, and in the end forgave her. It was not her fault that she
thought as she thought. Her rearing had been such as to make her look
upon every actress as a trull, just as it had qualified her calmly
to consider the monstrous marriage of convenience into which she was
invited.

He got back to the inn to find the company at table. Silence fell when
he entered, so suddenly that of necessity it must be supposed he was
himself the subject of the conversation. Harlequin and Columbine had
spread the tale of this prince in disguise caught up into the chariot
of a princess and carried off by her; and it was a tale that had lost
nothing in the telling.

Climene had been silent and thoughtful, pondering what Columbine had
called this romance of hers. Clearly her Scaramouche must be vastly
other than he had hitherto appeared, or else that great lady and he
would never have used such familiarity with each other. Imagining him
no better than he was, Climene had made him her own. And now she was to
receive the reward of disinterested affection.

Even old Binet’s secret hostility towards Andre-Louis melted before
this astounding revelation. He had pinched his daughter’s ear quite
playfully. “Ah, ah, trust you to have penetrated his disguise, my
child!”

She shrank resentfully from that implication.

“But I did not. I took him for what he seemed.”

Her father winked at her very solemnly and laughed. “To be sure, you
did. But like your father, who was once a gentleman, and knows the ways
of gentlemen, you detected in him a subtle something different from
those with whom misfortune has compelled you hitherto to herd. You knew
as well as I did that he never caught that trick of haughtiness, that
grand air of command, in a lawyer’s musty office, and that his speech
had hardly the ring or his thoughts the complexion of the bourgeois that
he pretended to be. And it was shrewd of you to have made him yours. Do
you know that I shall be very proud of you yet, Climene?”

She moved away without answering. Her father’s oiliness offended her.
Scaramouche was clearly a great gentleman, an eccentric if you please,
but a man born. And she was to be his lady. Her father must learn to
treat her differently.

She looked shyly--with a new shyness--at her lover when he came into the
room where they were dining. She observed for the first time that proud
carriage of the head, with the chin thrust forward, that was a trick of
his, and she noticed with what a grace he moved--the grace of one who in
youth has had his dancing-masters and fencing-masters.

It almost hurt her when he flung himself into a chair and exchanged
a quip with Harlequin in the usual manner as with an equal, and it
offended her still more that Harlequin, knowing what he now knew, should
use him with the same unbecoming familiarity.