CHAPTER 4

How I Stole the Huge Amount of Quap from Mordet Island

I

"We have to fight back," my uncle said. "We have to face the music!"

I remember that just looking at my uncle made me feel an impending disaster. He was sitting under the electric light, and the shadow of his hair cast dark stripes across his face. He looked shrunken, as if his skin had suddenly become loose and yellow. The room's decorations seemed to have lost their freshness, and although the blinds were up, there was a murky darkness rather than fog outside. The dingy outlines of the chimneys opposite were clearly visible, and the sky stretched out in a brown hue that only London could display.

"I saw a placard," I said. "It read, 'More Ponderevity'—the name of your business."

"That's Lord Boom's doing," my uncle said. "Lord Boom, the media magnate, and his damned newspapers. He is trying to tear me down. Ever since I offered to buy the 'Daily Decorator' newspaper, he has been attacking me relentlessly. And he thinks that consolidating 'Do Ut' will cut down our advertisements. He wants everything, damn him! He doesn't know how to make a deal. I'd like to smash his face in!"

"Well," I asked, "what should we do?"

"We must keep moving forward," my uncle answered.

"I'll crush Boom yet," he said, expressing a sudden burst of rage.

"Is there no other way?" I asked.

"We must keep going. A panic is spreading right now. Have you seen the rooms? Half of the people outside this morning are reporters. And if I say anything, they exaggerate it and print it!... They used to never exaggerate things like this! Now they add personal insults. I don't know what journalism is coming to. It's all Boom's doing."

He cursed Lord Boom with quite imaginative profanity.

"So," I said, "what can he actually do?"

"He can push us into a corner with time constraints, George, and tighten our funding. We've been handling a lot of money, and he is squeezing us."

"Are we financially secure?"

"Oh, we are secure, George. Trust me on that! But even so... imagination plays a big part in these matters... We are solid enough. That is not the issue."

He sighed. "Damn Boom!" he said, and his eyes met mine defiantly over his glasses.

"Can't we tighten our belts and run a bit more conservatively for a while?"

"Where?"

"Well, things like the Crest Hill construction—that massive and expensive building project."

"What!" my uncle shouted. "Stop Crest Hill because of Boom!" He swung his fist as if to hit the inkstand, then barely controlled himself. He finally spoke in a reasonable voice. "If I did that," he said, "he would throw a fit. It's no use, even if I wanted to. Everyone is watching the place. If I stop the construction, we will be bankrupt within a week."

An idea struck him. "I wish I could start a strike or something like that, but I have no such luck. I've treated the workers far too well. No, sink or swim, Crest Hill goes on until we are underwater."

I began asking questions, which immediately irritated him.

"Oh, George, drop these explanations!" he cried out. "You only make the situation look more rotten than it actually is. That's your way. This isn't a matter of numbers. We are fine. There is only one thing we have to do."

"What is that?"

"Show them value, George. That is why we need this Quap—the radioactive mineral—and why I so readily agreed to the proposal you brought me last week. We now have the option on the perfect filament, and all we need is Canadium—the rare metal. Except for you and me, no one in the world knows that there is more Canadium in existence than what could fit on the edge of a sixpence. No one knows that the perfect filament is more than just a theory, either. With just fifty tons of Quap, we can turn that theory into reality. We can make the lightbulb industry tuck its tail and beg. We could wrap up Ediswan and their whole crowd in a parcel without last year's pants and hats, and trade them away for a single pot of geraniums. Do you see? We'll do it through Business Organisations, and that will be it! Do you see? Capern's patented filament!

"The ideal and the reality! George, we will do it! We will succeed! And then we will deliver a powerful blow that will make Boom ponder for fifty years. He is lying in wait for our London and African meeting. Let him. Let him use all his newspapers to attack us. He says Business Organisations shares aren't worth fifty-two, but we are quoting them at eighty-four. Well, here we are, preparing for him. We are loading our gun."

His posture was triumphant.

"Yes," I said. "That sounds good. But I can't help thinking where we would be if we hadn't accidentally acquired Capern's perfect filament. As you know, it was purely by chance that I bought it."

He wrinkled his nose in disgust, unable to stand my unreasonableness.

"Anyway, the meeting is in June, and we haven't even started bringing in the Quap! We still need to load our gun."

"They leave on Tuesday."

"Did they get a brig?"

"They got a two-masted brig."

"Mr. Gordon-Nasmyth?" I expressed my doubts.

"He's as safe as a bank," my uncle said. "The more I see of him, the more I like him. I just wish we had a steamer instead of a sailing ship."

"And," I continued, "you seem to overlook something we used to consider important. You seem to be rushing too much because of this Canadium business and Capern's opportunity. After all, it is theft, and in a way, an international crime. There are two gunboats stationed on that coast."

I jumped up and looked out at the fog.

"And my God, to think this is our only chance! I never dreamed it."

I turned back to my uncle. "I've had my head in the clouds," I said.

"God only knows where my mind has been. But if this is our only chance, how could you leave it up to that adventurous madman to do it his way, and on a brig at that!"

"Well, you had a say in it too..."

"I wish I had been involved in this earlier. We should have sent a steamer to Lagos or somewhere else on the West Coast and started from there. Just imagine what it would be like for a brig in the channel with a southwest wind at this time of year!"

"George, I'm sure you would have pushed it through. Still, George... I believe in him."

"Yes," I said. "Yes, I believe in him too. To some extent. But..."

We picked up a telegram lying on his desk and opened it. My uncle's face turned pale and yellow. He set the thin paper down slowly and hesitantly, and took off his glasses.

"George," my uncle said, "luck has turned against us."

"What's wrong?"

He twisted his mouth strangely as he looked at the telegram.

"Look at this."

I picked it up and read:

"Car crash compound fracture of the leg Gordon Nasmyth what do we do about Mordet now"

For a moment, neither of us said a word.

"It's all right," I finally said.

"Huh?" my uncle asked.

"I will go. It's either I bring back the Quap, or we are finished."

II

I had a ridiculous conviction that I was "saving the situation."

"I am going," I said, very consciously and dramatically. I viewed the whole situation—how should I put it?—with very American colors.

I sat down next to my uncle. "Give me all the data you have," I said. "I will make this happen."

"But no one knows the exact location..."

"Nasmyth knows, and he will tell me."

"He was very tight-lipped," my uncle said, watching me closely.

"Now that he's injured, he'll tell me everything."

He thought about it. "I suppose he will."

"George," he said, "if you pull this off... Just like a time or two before when you stepped in with that tremendous energy of yours..."

He didn't finish the sentence.

"Give me that notebook," I said. "And tell me everything you know. Where is the ship? Where is Pollack? And where did that telegram come from? If we have to get that Quap, I will get it or die trying. Just hold out here until I return with it."...

And that was how I plunged into the wildest adventure of my life.

I immediately commandeered my uncle's best car. That night, I drove down to Bampton S.O. Oxon, the dispatch location listed on Nasmyth's telegram. With some effort, I tracked him down, explained the situation, and got clear instructions from him. By the following afternoon, I was inspecting the ship, the 'Maud Mary', with young Pollack, his cousin and assistant. The ship was quite a shock to me and not my style at all. It was a beastly two-masted brig that was used to the potato trade, and the faint, subtle smell of raw potatoes permeated the entire ship, overpowering even the smell of fresh paint. The ship was like an animal with dirty framing and an empty cargo hold. They had filled the ballast—the bottom weight used to balance the ship—with old iron, rusted rails, and iron sleepers. They had also prepared a random assortment of shovels and iron wheelbarrows to load the Quap. I reviewed the ship with Pollack, a tall, blond young man who smoked a pipe and wasn't very helpful, and then thought things over by myself. As a result, I did my best to scrounge up every wheeled plank I could find in Gravesend, and I gathered as much rope and thin cord as possible to tie down the cargo. I had a feeling we might need to build a makeshift dock. Aside from the heavy ballast, there were several unidentified boxes hidden away in a way that didn't draw attention, meant for some unspecified trade, but I didn't inspect them.

The captain was a highly unusual man who mistakenly thought we were going after copper ore. He was a Romanian Jew with twitchy, excitable features, who had earned his certificate after gaining some rudimentary naval experience in the Black Sea. The mate was an impenetrable and silent man from Essex. The crew was shockingly poorly dressed, impoverished, and filthy. Most of them were unwashed youths straight off of coal ships. One, the cook, was a mulatto, and the most heavily built among them was from Brittany. There was a bit of deception regarding our positions on the ship. I don't remember the exact details now, but I was called the supercargo, cargo manager, and Pollack was the steward. This only added to the piratical atmosphere that the lack of funds and Gordon-Nasmyth's original genius had already bestowed upon the enterprise.

Those two bustling days in Gravesend, spent in narrow, dirty streets under dull skies, were a new experience for me. It was unlike anything else in my life. I realized that I was a modern, civilized man. The food was foul, and the coffee was terrible. A stench filled the whole town. The innkeeper of the 'Good Intent' on the docks got into an argument with us before I could even get a hot bath. The bedroom where I slept was infested with exotic, greedy, flat parasites known locally as "bugs," crawling on the woodwork and walls everywhere. I fought them with insecticide, and in the morning, I found them in a coma. I was sinking deeply into the dingy underworld of the modern state, and I disliked this situation just as much as I did when I first experienced it staying at my Uncle Nicodemus Frapp's bakery in Chatham. By the way, there, I had to deal with a smaller, darker variety of cockroaches and all sorts of bedbugs.

I must confess that throughout all this time before our departure, I was painfully self-conscious, and in my imagination, Beatrice constantly played the role of my audience. As I said, I was "saving the situation," and I was acutely aware of that fact. On the evening before we set sail, instead of checking the medicine chest as I had originally intended, I drove out to Lady Grove to tell my aunt about my upcoming journey. After changing my clothes, I surprised Lady Osprey with an after-dinner visit.

The two ladies were home alone next to a large fireplace that looked especially cozy on a winter night. I remember the small parlor where they sat as being very bright and domestic. Lady Osprey, dressed in mauve with lace, was sitting on a chintz-covered sofa under the light of a tall, shaded lamp, meticulously playing a spread-out game of patience, solitaire,. Beatrice, wearing white that showed her neckline, was sitting in an armchair, smoking a cigarette and reading a book by the light of a lamp at her elbow. The room had white-paneled walls and chintz curtains. Around those two bright centers of light lay warm, deep shadows, within which a round mirror gleamed like a pool of brown water. I carried out my surprise visit acting like a slave to etiquette. There were moments when I think I truly made Lady Osprey believe that my visit was an unavoidable necessity, and that if I hadn't visited exactly when and how I did, it would have been negligent on my part. But at best, those were only fleeting moments.

They greeted me with restrained surprise. Lady Osprey showed interest in my face and closely examined my scar. Beatrice stood behind her concern. Our eyes met, and in hers, I could read startled questions.

"I am going to the West African coast," I said.

They asked questions, but my mood made me want to give vague answers.

"We have interests there. It's an urgent matter I must attend to. I don't know when I will return."

After that, I noticed Beatrice staring at me intently.

The conversation was quite difficult. I began expressing my lengthy gratitude for the kindness they had shown me after my accident. I tried to understand Lady Osprey's game of patience, but it seemed Lady Osprey didn't want me to understand her game. I was just on the verge of saying my goodbyes.

"You don't have to go just yet," Beatrice said suddenly.

She walked over to the piano, pulled a pile of sheet music from a nearby cabinet, checked Lady Osprey's back, and with a signal to me, intentionally dropped the music onto the floor.

"We need to talk," she said, sitting very close to me as I helped her pick up the sheets. "Turn the pages for me. At the piano."

"I don't know how to read music."

"Just turn the pages."

A moment later we were at the piano, and Beatrice was playing loudly and inaccurately. She glanced over her shoulder, and Lady Osprey was engrossed in her game of patience again. The old lady's face was very pink, and she seemed entirely absorbed in an attempt to cheat at the game without us noticing so she could win.

"Isn't the climate in West Africa terrible?" "Are you going to live there?" "Why are you going?"

Beatrice asked these questions in a low voice and gave me no chance to answer. Then, keeping the rhythm with the sheet music in front of her, she said:

"There's a garden behind the house. A door in the wall... leading to the lane. Do you understand?"

I turned the page without affecting her playing at all.

"When?" I asked.

She struck a chord. "I wish I could actually play this!" she said. "Midnight."

She focused on the music for a while.

"You might have to wait."

"I will wait."

She ended her playing in a manner that schoolboys would describe as "stashing it up."

"I cannot play tonight," she said, standing up and meeting my eyes. "I wanted to play a parting impromptu piece for you."

Looking up from her card game, Lady Osprey asked, "Beatrice, was the piece you just played by the famous German composer Wagner? It sounded very confusing."

I said my goodbyes and left. As I parted from Lady Osprey, I felt a strange twinge of conscience. Whether it was the first sign of approaching middle age or my lack of experience in romantic affairs to blame, I felt a very distinct objection to the thought of sneaking into this fine lady's estate through the garden gate. I drove my car up to the pavilion on the estate, found Cothope reading in bed, and told him for the first time that I was going to West Africa. I spent an hour with him sorting out all the remaining details regarding the product we were developing, 'Lord Roberts β,' and left the final touches in his hands until my return. I sent the car back to the Lady Grove estate and walked toward Bedley Corner, still wearing my fur coat because the January night was damp and bitterly cold. I found the path leading to the back of the Dower House without difficulty and arrived at the garden wall door ten minutes early. I lit a cigar and began pacing back and forth. This bizarre feeling of a secret rendezvous, this late-night garden door business, took me by surprise and completely shifted my mental attitude. I was jolted out of my usual selfish mindset and began thinking deeply about Beatrice—about that fairy-like charm of hers that always delighted me, that always caught me off guard, and that had, for example, made her invent this meeting on the spot.

She appeared one minute before midnight. The door opened softly, and a small, grey figure emerged into the cold drizzle, bareheaded and wearing a sheepskin motoring coat. She stepped lightly toward me, and in the dim light of her face, her eyes looked like shadows.

"Why are you going to West Africa?" she asked abruptly.

"A business crisis. I absolutely have to go."

"You are not leaving for good, are you? You will come back?"

"It will take three or four months at most," I replied.

"Then it has nothing to do with me?"

"Nothing at all," I said. "Why should it?"

"Oh, well then. One never knows what people might think or imagine." She took my arm and said, "Let's go for a walk."

I looked around at the darkness and the rain.

"It is perfectly fine," she said with a laugh. "We can follow the path to the Old Woking Road. Does it bother you? Of course it doesn't. My head doesn't mind the rain. We won't run into anyone anyway."

"How do you know?"

"I have wandered around like this before... Of course I have. Did you think..." She nodded back toward her house. "Did you think that was all there is to me?"

"No, good heavens!" I exclaimed. "I know very well that is not the case."

She took my arm and led me down the path. "Night is my time," she said beside me. "There is a bit of a werewolf in my blood. In these ancient families, you never know what kind of blood flows in the veins... I have often wondered myself... Anyway, here we are, completely alone in the world. There is nothing but darkness and cold, a cloudy sky and rain. And the two of us together."

"I like feeling the rain on my face and hair, don't you? When do you set sail?"

I told her I was leaving tomorrow.

"Oh, well, there is no tomorrow anymore. There is only you and I!" She stopped walking and faced me.

"You haven't said a single word except to answer my questions!"

"No," I replied.

"Last time, you were the one doing all the talking."

"Like a fool, I did. But now..."

We looked at each other's dim faces. "Are you glad to be here?"

"I am glad... I am starting to be... It is more than just being glad."

She placed her hands on my shoulders and pulled me down to kiss her.

"Ah!" she said, and for a moment, we just held each other tightly.

"That is all," she said, letting me go. "We are bundled up like luggage tonight. I knew we would kiss again someday. Always. The last time was so very long ago."

"It was among the fern stems."

"In the bracken forest. You remember. Your lips were cold then. Were mine? After so much time, and after so many things have happened... it is the same lips!... Now, let us trudge through this erased world together for a while. Yes, take my arm. Just walk. You see? Hold on tightly to me because I know the way. And do not speak... say nothing at all. Unless you really want to... Let me tell you a story! You see, my love, the entire world has been wiped away. The world is dead, and we are in this place. This dark, wild place... We are dead. Or perhaps the whole world is dead. No! We are the ones who are dead. No one can see us. We are shadows. We have stepped out of our places, stepped out of our bodies, and we are together. That is the best part—being together. That is why the world cannot see us, and why we can barely see the world. Shh! Is everything all right?"

"Everything is fine," I answered.

We stumbled along for a while in deep silence. We passed a faintly lit window streaked with rain.

"The foolish world," she said. "The foolish world! All it does is eat and sleep. If it weren't for the sound of raindrops falling from the trees, we would hear it snoring. The world dreams of such stupid things and makes such stupid judgments. It has no idea that we two are passing by, free from it and clear of it. You and I!"

We leaned against each other reassuringly.

"I am glad we are dead," she whispered. "I am glad we are dead. I was exhausted, my love. I was so exhausted, and so terribly tangled up."

She stopped abruptly.

We splashed through several puddles. I began to recall the things I had meant to say to her.

"Look here!" I cried out. "I want to help you with all my might. You are tangled up. What exactly is the matter? When I asked you to marry me, you said you would. But something is wrong."

My thoughts sounded clumsy as I spoke them aloud.

"Is it a problem concerning my social standing?... Or is it perhaps something to do with another man?"

A vast, confirming silence followed.

"You confuse me so much. At first—I mean in the very beginning—I thought you were trying to make me marry you."

"I was."

"And then what happened?"

After a long pause, she spoke. "Tonight, I cannot explain. No! I cannot explain it. I love you! But... explanations! My dear, tonight we are entirely alone in the world, and the world does not matter. Nothing else matters. I am here in the cold with you, and my bed is empty far away. I will tell you everything... I will tell you everything when circumstances allow it. That time will come soon enough. But not tonight... I will not."

She stepped away from my side and walked ahead of me.

She turned to face me. "Look here," she said, "I insist that you be dead. Do you understand? I am not joking. Tonight, you and I are completely outside of real life. This is our time. There might be other chances in the future, but let us not ruin this moment. Let's pretend we are in Hades, the underworld. A place where there is nothing to hide and nothing to tell. We don't even have bodies. There are no troubles. We loved each other down there but were forced apart, but now it does not matter. It is over... If you will not agree to this, I am going home."

"I wanted..." I began.

"I know. Oh, my love, if you would only understand, I understand too. Please just don't worry about it, and love me tonight."

"I do love you," I answered.

"Then love me," she replied. "And leave behind all the things that torment you. Love me! I am right here!"

"But!—"

"No!" she cut me off.

"Very well, have it your way."

And so she got her way. We wandered through the night together, and Beatrice talked to me about love...

Never in my life had I met a woman who could talk about love like that—a woman who could lay bare, develop, and touch with pure imagination that entire mass of delicate emotions that every woman might keep hidden away. She had read about love, she had thought about love, and thousands of sweet lyric poems had echoed through her mind, leaving beautiful fragments in her memory. She poured all of this out for me, shamelessly and skillfully. I cannot even begin to describe what that conversation was like, nor can I say how much of my delight came from the sheer magic of her voice or the warmth of her presence near me. And we kept walking, wrapped up warmly against the chilly air, following endless, slippery, dim roads. It felt to us as if there was not a single person on the streets, not a single beast in the fields.

"Why do people love each other?" I asked.

"Why shouldn't they?"

"But why do I love you? Why is your voice better than any other voice, and your face lovelier than any other face?"

"And why do I love you?" she asked in return. "Not just the good things about you, but the bad things too? Why are your dullness and your arrogance so endearing to me? Because they truly are. Tonight, I even love the raindrops clinging to your fur coat!"...

We talked like this, and finally, completely soaked and still flushed but a little tired, we parted at the garden gate. We had wandered for two hours in our strange, irrational, happy little world. And the entire world around us—especially Lady Osprey and her household—was fast asleep, undoubtedly dreaming of anything other than Beatrice wandering in the night rain.

She stood by the door, bundled up in her coat, her eyes shining brightly.

"Come back," she whispered. "I will be waiting for you."

She hesitated for a moment.

She reached out and touched the lapel of my coat. "I love you right now," she said, lifting her face toward mine.

I pulled her into my arms, trembling from head to toe. "Oh, God!" I cried. "And I have to leave!"

She slipped out of my embrace, paused, and looked at me. For a brief second, the world seemed full of all sorts of fantastic possibilities.

"Yes, go!" she said. Then she vanished, slamming the door shut. I was left standing alone in the pitch-black night, like a man who had just tumbled out of a fairy tale.

III

That expedition to Mordet Island stands entirely apart from the rest of my life. It is an isolated piece with a unique atmosphere all its own. That journey alone could easily fill an entire book, in fact, it did produce a rather massive official report,. But for the purposes of this novel, it is merely an episode, a supporting experience, and I intend to keep it that way.

Terrible weather, an impatient frustration over unbearable slowness and delays, seasickness, overall discomfort, and humiliating self-reflection—these are the core elements of my memories from that trip.

I was sick the entire voyage out. I don't know why. I have faced some fairly rough weather since I became a boat builder, but that was the only time I ever suffered from seasickness. That ghostly smell of potatoes on board was uniquely disgusting to me. On the return trip aboard the two-masted brig, every single one of us fell ill the moment we hit the open sea. I firmly believe it was because we were all poisoned by 'quap,' the radioactive material we were carrying. On the outward journey, the others recovered in a few days, but the stifling air below deck, the awful food, and the cramped, filthy living quarters kept me in a state of severe physical misery the entire time, even if it wasn't strictly seasickness. The ship was crawling with cockroaches and even more intimate pests. I was freezing cold the whole time until we passed Cape Verde, the volcanic islands off the coast of West Africa. After that, it became steaming hot. I had been so consumed by thoughts of Beatrice and my intense desire to get our ship, the Maud Mary, out to sea as quickly as possible, that I completely forgot to pack suitable clothing for myself—most notably, I lacked a coat. Good heavens! How desperately I missed having a coat! To make matters worse, I was cooped up with two of the most boring men in the Christian world: Pollack and the captain. Pollack, after enduring his illness in a dramatic fashion better suited for an opera house than a tiny cabin, suddenly became insufferably healthy and cheerful. He pulled out a manly pipe, smoked a tobacco as golden as his own hair, and spent his time equally divided between smoking and trying to clean the pipe. Holding a twisted piece of paper, he would frequently declare: "There are only three things that are best for cleaning a pipe. First is a feather, second is a piece of straw, and third is a woman's hairpin. I have never seen a ship like this. You can't find a single one of those three things anywhere. Last time I took this route, at least I found a hairpin. Found it on the floor of the captain's cabin. A regular deposit there. Right?... Feeling any better?"

I usually responded to this by swearing.

"Oh, you'll be fine soon. You don't mind if I puff a bit, do you? Eh?"

He never tired of asking me to play a hand of Nap, a type of card game. "It's a good game. It makes you forget the pain, and that is half the battle."

As the ship rolled, he would sway from side to side, puffing on his pipe of golden tobacco, and stare at the captain for hours on end with sleepy, blue eyes that somehow looked incredibly wise. The result of these long meditations was his constant repetition of the phrase, "The captain is a Card," meaning he is a real character. "He wants to know what we are up to. He wants to know incredibly badly."

That did indeed seem to be the captain's main obsession. At the same time, however, he tried to impress upon me that he was a gentleman from a noble family, and he constantly aired various views criticizing English people, English literature, and the English system of government.

He had learned his sailing in the Romanian Navy and had learned English from a book, which meant he sometimes still pronounced the 'e' at the end of words like "there" and "here." He was a naturalized British citizen, but his endless nitpicking about everything English stirred up a reluctant and unpleasant sense of patriotism in me. Pollack would purposefully try to "draw him out" to see what he would say. Only heaven knows how close I came to committing murder.

For fifty-three days on the outward journey, I was trapped with these two men and a deeply depressed, shy mate who read the Bible on Sundays and spent the rest of his free time in a lethargic daze. It was fifty-three days confined in a lightly loaded ship that rolled, pitched, and tossed about, surrounded by constant stench, a sickening hunger that made me turn away from the sight of food, darkness, cold, and rain. And all the while, the sand in the hourglass of my uncle's fortune continued to slip away. It was absolute misery! Out of all that time, only one thing stands out brightly in my memory: a sunny morning in the Bay of Biscay, seeing the sapphire-green frothing waves, a single bird following in our wake, and our ship's masts swaying against the sky. But then, the wind and rain closed in on us once again.

You must not imagine that these were normal days of average length. They were more like long, damp slabs of time stretching all the way to the horizon, and most of that length consisted of night. Hour after hour, I would pace the staggering deck in the chilly, windy, splashing, and spitting darkness, wearing a borrowed sou'wester, a waterproof sailor's hat. Or I would sit in the cabin, sick and bored, staring at the faces of my inescapable companions by the light of a lamp that produced more smell than illumination. I would watch Pollack go up, up, up, and then down, down, down with the motion of the ship, an unlit pipe in his mouth, humorously observing the captain and slowly arriving at the conclusion for the seventy-seventh time that the captain was indeed a "Card." Meanwhile, a swift and endless stream of sophistry flowed from the captain's mouth. "This England, it is not an aristocratic country, no! It is a country of glorified bourgeoisie! It is a plutocracy. There has been no aristocracy in England since the Wars of the Roses. In the rest of Europe, east of the Latin countries, yes; but in England, no."

"Your England is entirely middle-class. Everything you look at is middle-class. Respectable! Even when something is excellent, you people call it shocking. Madame Grundy!, A term for a rigid moralist,. Everything here is limited, calculating, and selfish. That is why your art is so limited, why your fiction and philosophy are so weak, and why you are all so unartistic. You want nothing but profit! You only care about what will make money! What else could one expect?"...

He possessed all those violent, exaggerated speech habits that we Western Europeans have long since abandoned. He would shrug his shoulders, wave his arms wildly, thrust his face forward, and gesture strangely with his hands right under your nose, until you felt a strong urge to simply smack them away., The captain was a Romanian Jew., Day after day this erratic behavior continued, but I had to keep my anger to myself. I needed to reserve my energy for the crucial task ahead: ensuring that the *quap*—a mysterious radioactive material we were seeking—was safely loaded and properly stowed aboard. I knew the man would raise a thousand objections to everything we had to do. He talked constantly in a hazy manner, like someone drugged. Yet, he was clearly unable to handle the responsibilities of navigation. He fretted endlessly, consumed by anxiety over the ship’s position and constantly imagining dangers. If a wave struck the ship even slightly harder than usual, he would dash out of his cabin in an instant, firing off a barrage of panicked questions. He was haunted by fears of the cargo shifting or of insidious leaks secretly flooding the hull. As we drew closer to the African coast, his terror of hidden rocks and shoals became so intense that it infected the rest of the crew.

"I do not know this coast," he used to say repeatedly. "I only came here because Gordon-Nasmyth, the leader of this expedition, was supposed to come too. But then he didn't come!"

"Fortunes of war, it couldn't be helped," I replied, though I tried in vain to understand why Gordon-Nasmyth had chosen such men. It might have been pure chance, or perhaps Gordon-Nasmyth had an artistic temperament that favored dramatic contrasts. It was also possible that the captain's anti-British sentiments perfectly suited Gordon-Nasmyth’s own anti-imperialist views.

In truth, he was an exceptionally incompetent captain. On the whole, I was glad I had come along, even at the eleventh hour, to take charge of the situation., Incidentally, out of sheer nervousness, the captain did eventually run the ship aground at the tip of Mordet’s Island. Fortunately, we managed to break free after an hour or so of hard work in a small boat amidst the heavy swells.,

I suspected the first mate's opinion of the captain long before he ever expressed it aloud. He was generally a taciturn man, but one day he finally opened up. He had been sitting at the table, arms folded, smoking his pipe with a dreary expression, while the captain's shrill voice drifted down from the deck above.

The mate lifted his heavy eyelids, looked at me for a moment, and finally began to speak. He removed his pipe from his mouth, and I leaned in, full of expectation. He was finally going to say something. Before speaking, he nodded reassuringly a couple of times.

"He is..."

He shook his head with a vague gesture, but even a child could tell he was criticizing the captain.

"He's a foreigner."

He hesitated for a moment, then, to make his point perfectly clear, he drove it home.

"That's what he is—a *Dago*!", A derogatory term often used for Southern Europeans,.

He nodded firmly, like a man striking the final blow on a nail, and I could see he was completely satisfied with his definitive remark. His face, once resolute, became as tranquil and calm as a massive hall after a public rally has dispersed. He put his pipe back in his mouth, locking his thoughts away once more.

"He's a Romanian Jew, isn't he?" I asked.

He nodded in agreement, though with a dark and grim expression.

Nothing more needed to be said. The point was made. But from that moment on, I knew I could trust him, and we became friends. Even though I never actually had to rely on him, it did not diminish our relationship.

The lives of the crew in the forward part of the ship were not vastly different from ours, though their quarters were much more cramped, dirty, humid, and infested with vermin. The coarse food they were given wasn't entirely terrible, to the point where they almost deluded themselves into thinking they were eating as well as fighting cocks. From what I could see, most of them were entirely destitute. Hardly any of them possessed proper sailing gear, and the few meager belongings they did have only served as a source of mutual suspicion. As we pitched and floundered southward on our arduous journey, they gambled, fought, and treated each other brutally, shouting and wrangling constantly until we had to protest the unbearable noise.

There is no romance to the sea on a small sailing vessel as I experienced it. Such romance exists only in the minds of dreamers safely on land. These brigs, schooners, and brigantines that still operate out of small ports are merely rotting relics of a bygone era of petty trade, as obsolete as a decaying Georgian-era mansion that has devolved into a slum. They are essentially floating fragments of slums, drifting on the ocean much like icebergs calving from a glacier. A civilized person who has learned to wash, who understands physical dignity, clean dining, and the value of time, can no longer endure them. These old vessels will soon pass away, and the noisy, coal-burning steamships will take their place, ushering in a cleaner, more efficient era.

In any case, that was how I made my voyage to Africa, eventually arriving in a world of suffocating fogs, the hot stench of rotting vegetation, the sound of crashing surf, and intermittent glimpses of the distant coastline. During that time, I lived a strange, intensely isolated life, like a beast trapped at the bottom of a deep well. All my former ways of life were severed, and my past vistas became nothing more than distant memories.

The impending bankruptcy I had been trying to salvage back home now felt incredibly small and remote; its urgency had faded completely. Beatrice, Lady Grove, my uncle, the Hardingham hotel, my soaring experiences in early aviation, and my usual broad, efficient perspective on the world—all of it became as distant as if they belonged to a world I had left behind forever.

IV

These African memories stand completely apart from the rest of my life. It was my first expedition into the untamed realms of nature, far removed from the world ruled by men. It was my first encounter with the sweltering, jungle-producing side of Mother Nature—a stark contrast to the cold, swirling air currents I had come to know so well. These memories are woven into a tapestry of blinding sunshine, unbearable heat, and a constant, warm stench of decay. The journey ended in a torrential downpour—a frantic, violent deluge unlike any rain I had ever seen—but our initial, slow passage through the channels behind Mordet’s Island began under an incandescent, scorching sun.

In my memory, we are still navigating through that area on our blistered, dirty ship, the *Maud Mary*, with its patched sails and battered mermaid figurehead. We moved cautiously, constantly checking the depth, passing between towering walls of forest where the trees stood knee-deep in the water. With a gentle breeze on our quarter, we rounded Mordet’s Island, knowing the *quap* we sought was likely less than a day's journey away.

Here and there, strange blossoms pierced the dark, damp intensity of the green jungle with vibrant, trumpet-like bursts of color. Unseen creatures crept through the undergrowth, peering out momentarily before darting back into the silence with a rustle. The sluggish, opaque water was constantly swirling with subtle movements; little clusters of bubbles would merrily rise to the surface, hinting at submerged conflicts and hidden tragedies below. Occasionally, groups of crocodiles basked in the sun like stranded fleets of logs. By day, a dreary stillness hung over everything, broken only by the buzzing of insects, the creaking of our ship, the deckhand calling out the water depth, and the captain’s panicked shouts. But at night, when we moored the ship to a clump of trees, the darkness awakened a thousands swamp creatures. Screams and howling beasts echoed from the forest, making us profoundly grateful to be safely afloat on the water. Once, we saw long, blazing fires burning between the tree trunks. We passed two or three native villages on the shore, where brown-skinned women and children came out to stare and gesture at us. In one creek, a man paddled out in a boat and shouted at us in an unknown tongue. Finally, we arrived at a vast, open expanse—a broad lake rimmed by a desolate wasteland of mud, bleached debris, and dead trees, completely devoid of crocodiles, water birds, or any signs of life. Far in the distance, exactly as Nasmyth had described, we saw the ruins of the deserted station. And right beside it, under a massive ridge of rock, were two heaps of buff-colored rubble: the *quap*! The forest receded behind us, and the land to our right became a barren wasteland. Beyond a notch in the rocky ridge, we could see the surf and the open sea.

We slowly and carefully steered the ship toward the heaps and the ruined jetty. The captain approached and spoke.

"Is this it?" he asked.

"Yes," I replied.

"Have we come here to trade?"

His tone was sarcastic.

"No," I said.

"Gordon-Nasmyth would have told me long ago what we actually came here for."

"I’ll tell you now," I said. "We are going to bring the ship as close as possible to those two heaps of material—do you see them?—under the rock. Then we will throw all our ballast overboard and load that stuff into the hold. After that, we are going home."

"May I presume to ask... is it gold?"

"No," I answered bluntly. "It is not gold."

"Then what is it?"

"It’s a material... of some commercial value."

"We can't do it," he said.

"We can," I assured him.

"We cannot," he insisted confidently. "I don't mean what you think I mean. You know so little. This... is forbidden territory."

I suddenly flared up in anger and turned on him, meeting his bright, excited eyes. For a minute, we glared at each other. Then I said, "That is our risk to take. I know trade is forbidden here, but this isn't trade. This job has to be done."

His eyes glittered, and he shook his head.

The brig slowly maneuvered through the twilight toward this strange, blistered, scorched stretch of beach. The man at the wheel strained to listen to the low, fierce argument that ensued between the captain and me, which Pollack soon joined. We finally moored within a hundred yards of our target, and throughout dinner and late into the night, we argued fiercely with the captain over our right to load whatever we pleased. "I will have nothing to do with it," he stubbornly repeated. "I wash my hands of this." It seemed our arguments that night were in vain. "If it is not trade," he pointed out, "then it is prospecting and mining. That is even worse. Anyone who knows anything about laws outside of England knows that is a far more serious offense."

We continued to argue until I lost my temper and cursed at him. Pollack remained calm, chewing watchfully on his pipe, his blue eyes tracking the captain's gestures. Finally, I went up to the deck to cool off. The sky was overcast, and I noticed the entire crew gathered at the bow, staring blankly at a faint, quivering luminosity spreading over the heaps of *quap*—a strange phosphorescence, much like the glow sometimes seen on rotting wood. Across the beach to the east and west, there were patches and streaks of something that looked like spilled moonlight.

In the early hours of the morning, I was still awake, turning over scheme after scheme in my mind to bypass the captain's opposition. I had decided I would get that *quap* aboard even if I had to kill someone to do it. Never in my life had I been so frustrated, especially after enduring such an intolerable voyage! A knock came at my cabin door, it opened, and a bearded face appeared. "Come in," I said. A dark, talkative figure stepped into the obscurity of my cabin, filling the space with his whispers and exaggerated gestures. It was the captain. He, too, had been awake, thinking things over. He had come to explain himself—at great, exhausting length. I lay there despising him, wondering if Pollack and I could simply lock him in his cabin and run the ship without him. Amidst a cloud of excuses, I heard him say, "I do not want to ruin this expedition." Then I finally managed to untangle his true demand: "A commission... shush, a small commission... for taking on special risks!" The phrase "special risks" came up frequently. I let him talk until he had exhausted his explanations. It turned out he was also demanding an apology for something I had said earlier. No doubt I had insulted him quite generously. At last, he made a concrete offer. I broke my silence and began to bargain.

"Pollack!" I shouted, hammering on the partition wall.

"What's up?" Pollack asked.

I stated the situation concisely.

A silence followed.

"He's a Card," Pollack said, meaning he was quite a character. "Let's give him his commission. I don't mind."

"Eh?" I cried.

"I just said he's a piece of work, that's all," Pollack replied. "I'm coming in."

He appeared in the doorway as a faint white figure and joined our intense, whispered negotiations.

We had to buy the captain off. We had to promise him ten percent of our highly uncertain future profits. We agreed to give him ten percent of whatever we sold the cargo for, over and above his legitimate pay. Battered and exhausted by the bargaining, I found minor consolation in the irony that I, representing the Gordon-Nasmyth expedition, would eventually be selling this material to myself, acting as Business Organisations. He further infuriated me by insisting that our agreement be put in writing. "In the form of a letter," he demanded persistently.

"All right," I agreed. "In the form of a letter. Let's do it! Get a light!"

"And the apology," he said as he folded up the letter.

"All right," I muttered. "I apologize."

My hand shook with rage as I wrote, and afterward, I couldn't sleep because of my burning hatred for him. Eventually, I got out of bed. I found myself unusually clumsy and uncoordinated. I stubbed my toe against the cabin door and cut my face while shaving. Ultimately, I found myself pacing the deck at dawn in a state of extreme exasperation. As the sun suddenly rose, splashing blinding light into my eyes, I swore at it. I caught myself imagining new conflicts with the crew, muttering aloud as I rehearsed future arguments.

The malaria of the *quap*—its cursed, unnatural influence—was already seeping into my blood.

V

Sooner or later, the ridiculous embargo currently placed on the entire coast east of Mordet’s Island will be lifted, and the true reality of the *quap* deposits will be confirmed. I am absolutely certain that we were merely scraping the surface outcropping of a massive vein of nodulated radioactive deposits dipping steeply toward the sea. Those heaps were just the crumbled contents that had fallen from two irregular cavities in the rock; they were as natural as any scree or rubble pile at the base of a cliff. The mud stretching for miles along the water's edge is heavily mixed with *quap*; it is highly radioactive, entirely devoid of life, and faintly phosphorescent in the dark. Readers will find the full details of my observations in the *Geological Magazine* for October 1905, and I refer them to that publication. There, they will also find my unconfirmed theories regarding its true nature. If my theories are correct, this substance is far more scientifically significant than the incidental trace elements found in rare metals like pitchblende, uranium ore, or rutile, upon which the revolutionary discoveries of the last decade have been based. Those previously discovered elements merely represent small, molecular centers of disintegration—the mysterious decay and rotting of elements that were once considered the most stable building blocks of nature. But with *quap*, there is something else at work. The only word that comes close to describing it is *cancerous*, and even that falls short. It is something that creeps and survives by destroying everything around it; an elemental stirring and violent disarrangement, strange and incalculably malevolent.

This is not merely an imaginative metaphor. To my mind, radioactivity is a literal disease affecting matter itself. Furthermore, it is a highly contagious disease. It spreads. If you bring these degraded, crumbling atoms near stable ones, those healthy atoms will soon catch the contagion and begin swinging themselves out of coherent existence. It is exactly the same phenomenon in the physical world as the decay of an old culture in human society—a catastrophic loss of traditions, distinctions, and stable, predictable reactions. When I think of these inexplicable centers of dissolution that have emerged on our globe—and these *quap* heaps are undoubtedly the largest ever discovered in the world, with all others being mere specks in grains of sand or crystals—I am haunted by a grotesque, terrifying vision. I imagine the ultimate corrosion, dry-rotting, and dispersal of our entire world. I picture a future where, while humanity continues to struggle and dream, the very substance of the earth will mutate and crumble beneath our feet. I mention this here as a bizarre, persistent delusion that haunts me. Just imagine if that is truly how our planet ends: no glorious climax, no magnificent finale, no towering culmination of human achievement, but simply... atomic decay! To the scientific theories of a suffocating comet, dark matter colliding from space, the sun burning out, or Earth falling out of orbit, I add this new and far more plausible end—an end to this strange cosmic side-plot of matter we call human life. I cannot truly believe this will be the end; no human soul could believe in such a bleak destiny and go on living. Yet, both science and reason point toward it as a distinct possibility. If a single human being—like a rickety, diseased infant—can be born by accident only to die a futile death, why couldn't the same happen to the entire human race? These are questions I have never been able to answer, and which I no longer even attempt to answer, but the thought of *quap* and its dark mysteries always brings them rushing back to my mind.

I can swear as a witness that the beach and mud flats extending for two miles or more in either direction were a completely lifeless wasteland—more devoid of life than I ever could have imagined tropical mud could be. Any dead branches, leaves, rotting fish, or other debris that drifted ashore quickly shriveled up and turned a bleached white. Occasionally, crocodiles would emerge from the water to bask, and now and then, water birds would land to briefly investigate the mud and the rocky ridges rising from it, driven by momentary curiosity. But that was the absolute limit of their interest. And the air there felt simultaneously blistering and austere, dry and...

A sharp wind blew in, tearing at our skin—entirely different from that hot, damp air which had greeted us when we first arrived in Africa, and which we had already grown accustomed to.

I believe the primary effect of the radioactive mineral, quap, upon us was that it set our nerves on edge, though this is merely my personal speculation. In any case, it added a sharpness to life, much like a cold east wind. We all became irritable, slow, and lethargic, and we progressively lost patience with our own lethargy. We barely managed to moor the ship to the rocks before running aground in the mud; because the mud was as slippery as butter, we decided to simply stay there and pull the ship out after the work was done. Our attempts to lay down planks and railway sleepers to move the quap onto the ship were as clumsy as that sort of work often is. The captain held a superstitious fear regarding his cargo hold. The mere thought of loading the quap made him wave his hands wildly and shout, rendering him completely incompetent. His cries, which turned into increasingly incomprehensible language with every approaching crisis, still echo vividly in my memory.

However, I cannot now record the entire history of those foolish and grueling days—how a sailor named Milton fell from a plank about 30 feet, roughly 9 meters, down to the beach along with his barrow, breaking his arm and ribs; how Pollack and I set his bones and nursed him through the ensuing fever; how the men succumbed one by one to malarial fever; and how, due to my reputation as a scientist, I had to play the role of doctor and feed them quinine, a malaria treatment. After realizing that quinine was actually harmful, I gave them rum and small doses of Easton's Syrup, a tonic, though heaven and Gordon-Nasmyth—the man who planned this expedition—alone know why such bottles were aboard the ship. We lay in agony for three whole days without loading a single barrow of quap. When the work finally resumed, boils began to break out on the men's hands. There were no gloves. So, I tried to get them to wrap their hands in stockings or greased rags when shoveling and pushing the barrows. But they refused, citing the heat and discomfort. My attempts, however, made them realize that the quap was the cause of their illness, ultimately triggering an unofficial strike that brought our loading operations to a close. "We've had enough," they said, and they meant it. They went to the stern and said the same to the captain. They terrified him.

During those few days, the weather was horrific in various ways. First, a furnace-like heat struck beneath a frighteningly blue sky. Next, a hot fog that clung to the throat like wool rose up, making the men on the planks look like colorless giants. Then came fierce thunderstorms and maddening torrential rain. Through all that illness, heat, and confusion, the single driving force that possessed me was to keep the loading operation going—to maintain at least one goal, no matter what else happened. The sound of shovels digging into the dirt, the squeaking shrieks of the barrows, the pattering footsteps of men scurrying across the swaying high planks, and finally, the thudding crash as the quap poured into the cargo hold. "Another barrow loaded, thank God! Another barrow, worth 1,500 or maybe 2,000 pounds, to save the Ponderevo family!..."

During those weeks of effort behind Mordet Island, I realized many things about myself and humanity. I can now understand the mind of an evil employer or a slave driver. I had dragged these men into a danger they did not understand, fiercely determined to overcome their resistance, break them, and use them for my purpose, and I hated them. But while the quap was near me, I actually hated all of humanity.

And my mind was filled with the fear and desperation that we might be discovered and all our work halted. I wanted to head back out to sea, load our stolen goods, and sail north. I was terrified that our ship's mast would be seen from the sea, betraying our presence to curious passersby. And one evening, as the work neared completion, I saw a canoe with three natives far across the lake. I borrowed the captain's binoculars to look closely at them and could see them staring right at us. One looked like a mixed-race man and was dressed in white. They watched us very quietly for a long time before rowing off into a shadowed channel in the forest and disappearing.

And for three nights in a row, as if painfully crushing my inflamed imagination, my uncle's face appeared in my dreams. His face was pale like a clown's, and his neck was slashed with a long, yellow cut from ear to ear. "Too late," he said. "Too late!..."

Chapter VI

A few days after starting the quap mining operation, I suffered from severe insomnia and agony, making the inside of the ship an unbearable place. Just before sunrise, I borrowed Pollack's gun, walked down the planks, crossed the piles of quap, and paced the beach. That day, I walked about a mile and a half, roughly 2.4 km, past the ruins of the old base. I took an interest in the desolate landscape around me and, upon returning, was able to sleep for almost an hour. Spending a long time alone, without the captain, Pollack, or anyone else, was a true pleasure. So I repeated this walk the next morning, and the next, until it became a habit. Once the digging and hauling of the quap became organized, there was little for me to do, so my walks grew longer, and soon I started packing food to take with me.

I hurried my steps far past the area devastated by the quap. On its outskirts, there was first a zone of stunted plants, then a swamp-like jungle that was hard to push through, and finally, a forest began, featuring massive tree trunks, tangled vines, and roots mixed with mud. Here, I would dawdle in a state somewhere between plant-collecting and daydreaming, always wanting to know what lay up high where the sunlight shone. And it was exactly here that I killed a man.

It was the most meaningless and purposeless murder imaginable. Even now, as I write down the details I remember so well, the bizarre and senseless nature of the act strikes me again, completely at odds with the neat, clear theories people hold about life and the meaning of the world. I committed this act, and I want to tell what I did, but I cannot explain why I did it, nor particularly why I should be held responsible for it.

That morning, I found a trail in the forest, and an ominous thought occurred to me that this was a path used by people. I didn't want to run into anyone. The less our expedition encountered the African locals, the better it was for achieving our goals. Up to that point, we had been unusually free from native harassment. So, I turned back and was walking over mud, tree roots, and dry leaves fallen from the green forest when, suddenly, I saw my victim.

I spotted him about 40 feet, roughly 12 meters, away, standing perfectly still and watching me.

He was by no means a beautiful sight. He was very black and entirely naked except for a dirty loincloth. His legs were crooked, and his toes were spread wide. The top of his clothing and a string tied around his waist made his bulging stomach wrinkle. His forehead was narrow and low, his nose was very flat, and his lower lip was swollen and purple. His hair was short and curly, and he wore a string and a small leather pouch around his neck. He carried a musket and had a powder flask tucked into his belt. It was a bizarre standoff. Standing opposite him, I—though perhaps a bit dirty—was still an elaborately civilized human being, someone born, raised, and educated within a vague tradition. In my hand, I held an unfamiliar gun. And though each of us was essentially a being with a vibrant, tautly tense brain, extremely excited by this encounter, neither of us knew anything about the other's mind or how to deal with him.

He stepped back a pace or two, then stumbled, turned, and started to run away.

"Stop," I shouted. "Stop, you fool!" I shouted in English and started chasing him. But over the tree roots and mud, I was no match for him.

An absurd thought popped into my head: "I can't let him get away and tell people!"

Simultaneously with that thought, I immediately brought my feet together and raised my gun. Taking aim very calmly, I carefully pulled the trigger and shot him exactly in the back.

I watched my bullet shatter the space between his shoulder blades, and I watched it with a surge of pure ecstasy. "Got him," I said, dropping my gun, and he collapsed, dying without a single groan. "My God!" I exclaimed in a voice full of surprise. "I killed him!" I looked around, then cautiously stepped forward with a mixture of curiosity and astonishment to look at this person whom I had so ruthlessly thrown out of our shared world. I approached him not as one approaches something they have made or accomplished, but as one approaches something stumbled upon by chance.

The front of his chest was horribly smashed. He must have died instantly. I bent down, lifted his shoulder, and realized this fact. I set him down, stood around, and looked through the trees. "My God!" I said. Except for surgical tools, mummies, or that sort of common spectacle, he was the second human corpse I had ever seen in my life. I stood over him, marveling endlessly.

Amid that confusion, a practical thought arose: Had anyone heard the gunshot?

I reloaded my gun.

After a moment, I felt a little more relieved and turned my attention back to the corpse I had killed. What should I do now?

The thought occurred to me that I might have to bury him. Regardless, I had to hide him. I thought calmly, then placed my gun within easy reach, grabbed his arm, dragged him to where the mud looked soft, and shoved him in. His powder flask fell from his loincloth, and I went back to pick it up. Then, I pressed him down firmly with the butt of my rifle to bury him.

Later, this entire incident felt utterly horrifying to me, but at the time, it was a completely businesslike affair. Like someone packing a suitcase in a hotel room, I looked around for any other visible traces that might reveal his death.

As I got my bearings and carefully made my way back to the ship, I was seriously focused, like a boy caught up in poaching. It wasn't until I almost reached the ship that the true scale of the event dawned on me—the realization that this was something different from killing a rabbit or a bird.

But when night fell, it took on a massive, ominous form. "My God!" I suddenly woke up and cried out. "But that was murder!"

After that, I lay awake with my eyes open, staring at my memories. In some bizarre way, these visions mingled with dreams of my despairing uncle. The black body—now mutilated, partially buried, and feeling no longer dead but sharply alive and aware—merged with the yellow wound beneath my uncle's face. I tried to shake this horrible obsession from my mind, but it crushed all my efforts.

The next day felt entirely dark due to the sensory memory of that hideous creature's corpse. I am not a superstitious person at all, but it pulled at me. It drew me back into those bushes, back to the very place where I had hidden him.

Some evil, disgusting beast had dug him up, and he lay there unearthed.

I systematically reburied his swollen, mutilated corpse and returned to the ship for another night of dreams. The entire next morning, I suppressed the urge to go to him, playing cards with Pollack while harboring the secret that was secretly eating away at me. I didn't set out until evening, but the night deepened, and I failed to reach my destination. I told no one about what I had done.

The following day, I went there early, but he was gone. Around the mud hole from which he had been dragged, there were human footprints and hideous stains.

I returned to the ship, bewildered and confused. That day, the men gathered at the stern with blistered hands and faces and sullen eyes. When they declared through their spokesman, Edwards, "We've had enough. We mean it," I answered very willingly: "So have I. Let's go now."

Chapter VII

It was by no means too early. People had been scouting us, telegrams had been exchanged, and less than four hours after we went out to sea, we ran into a gunboat, a warship equipped with guns, that had been dispatched to the coast to find us. Had they spotted us a little earlier, we would have been trapped behind the island like animals in a snare. It was a night of fast-moving clouds and intermittent moonlight. The wind and waves were fierce, and we rolled forward through fog and driving rain. Suddenly, the world turned white with moonlight. The gunboat appeared on the eastern sea, riding the waves as a long, black shape.

The gunboat immediately spotted the Maud Mary and fired a sort of warning shot to stop us.

The navigator looked back at me.

"Should I tell the captain?"

"Who cares about the captain?" I said, and we left the captain to sleep through the entire two-hour chase until the rainstorm swallowed us. We then changed course and sailed right across their path. By morning, only their smoke was visible.

We had escaped Africa, and since we had our loot aboard, it seemed nothing stood between us and home.

For the first time since I had fallen ill on the River Thames, my mood improved. I was seasick and felt physically disgusted, but despite the discomfort, my mind was at ease. As far as I could calculate at the time, the situation was resolved. I pictured myself returning triumphantly to the River Thames, and there was nothing in this world that could stop old Capern's perfect filament, an invention, from hitting the market within two weeks. The monopoly on lightbulbs was at my feet.

I was freed from the spell of that bloody black corpse mixed with gray-brown mud. I was returning to baths, proper food, aeronautics, and Beatrice, my lover,. I was escaping this well I had fallen into, returning to Beatrice and my real life. Seasickness and quap fever could not suppress my soaring spirits.

I told the captain I agreed with his opinion that the British were the scum of Europe, a trashy mob pushed to the west, and I lost my remaining few pennies playing cards with Pollack.

And then, as we headed into the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Cape Verde, west of Africa, the ship began to break into pieces. I won't claim for a second to understand what happened. But Greiffenhagen's recent research on the effects of radium on plant woody tissue nicely supports my idea that the radiation from the quap rapidly rotted the wood fibers.

From the beginning, the ship felt different from usual, and as strong winds and waves began to shake it, it started to leak. Soon, it leaked—not from any specific point, but from everywhere. I mean, there wasn't a hole in the ship; water started seeping in from the edges of the rotting planks, and then it came straight through the planks themselves.

I firmly believe the water came right through the wood. First it seeped, then it trickled. It was like trying to carry wet sugar in a thin paper bag. Soon, we were sucking in water as if a door had been opened in the bottom of the ship.

Once the leaking started, the situation progressed beyond all our efforts. We did our best for a day or two. I still vividly remember the fatigue in my arms and lower back from pumping, the sight of the clear stream of water bouncing up with every pump, having to stop and rest only to get up and pump again, and the memory of fatigue piling upon fatigue. Finally, we could think of nothing but pumping. Man became an enchanted torture machine doomed to pump forever. When Pollack finally approached me with a pipe in his mouth, I remember it as pure relief.

"The captain says the ship is going to sink right now," he said, chewing on his mouthpiece. "What?"

"Good idea!" I said. "We can't pump forever."

And so, without hurrying or rejoicing, we sullenly and wearily boarded the lifeboat and moved away from the Maud Mary. We leaned on our oars on the glassy sea, remaining motionless as we waited for the ship to sink. We all stayed silent, even the captain, until the ship went down. And then, he muttered in a very gentle voice:

"That's the first ship I've ever lost... And it wasn't a fair game! This was a cargo no man should ever take. No!"

I stared blankly at the slow waves swirling over the departed Maud Mary, and at the sinking of the Ponderevo family's last chance to revive their businesses. I felt an exhaustion that transcended emotion. I remembered the bravado I had shown Beatrice and my uncle, my immediate response of "I'll go," and the fruitless months I had spent since that reckless decision. I couldn't help but laugh at myself and at fate.

But the captain and the sailors didn't laugh. The sailors glared at me, rubbed their sore, blistered hands, and leaned forward to start rowing...

As everyone knows, we were rescued by the Portland Castle, a liner of the Union-Castle Line.

The barber on that ship was a truly remarkable man. He fitted me for a suit and even got me a clean shirt and warm underwear. I took a hot bath, dressed up, and drank a bottle of Burgundy wine with dinner.

"Now then," I said. "Do you have any newspapers? I need to know what's happening in the world."

The steward gave me the newspapers he had, but I landed in Plymouth largely unaware of how things were going in the world. I shook off Pollack, left the captain and navigator at a hotel, and the sailors at a seamen's shelter, waiting until I could send the money to pay their wages, and headed for the station.

The newspapers I bought, the posters I saw—indeed, all of England was buzzing with the news of my uncle's bankruptcy.
